Project Gutenberg's The Adventures of Sherlock Holmes, by Arthur Conan DoyleThis eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and withalmost no restrictions whatsoever.
You may copy it, give it away orre-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License includedwith this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.netTitle: The Adventures of Sherlock HolmesAuthor: Arthur Conan DoylePosting Date: April 18, 2011 [EBook #1661]First Posted: November 29, 2002Language: English START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ADVENTURES OF SHERLOCK HOLMES Produced by an anonymous Project Gutenberg volunteer and Jose MenendezTHE ADVENTURES OF SHERLOCK HOLMESbySIR ARTHUR CONAN DOYLE   I.
A Scandal in Bohemia  II.
The Red-headed League III.
A Case of Identity  IV.
The Boscombe Valley Mystery   V. The Five Orange Pips  VI.
The Man with the Twisted Lip VII.
The Adventure of the Blue CarbuncleVIII.
The Adventure of the Speckled Band  IX.
The Adventure of the Engineer's Thumb   X.
The Adventure of the Noble Bachelor  XI.
The Adventure of the Beryl Coronet XII.
The Adventure of the Copper BeechesADVENTURE I.
A SCANDAL IN BOHEMIAI.
To Sherlock Holmes she is always THE woman.
I have seldom heardhim mention her under any other name.
In his eyes she eclipsesand predominates the whole of her sex.
It was not that he feltany emotion akin to love for Irene Adler.
All emotions, and thatone particularly, were abhorrent to his cold, precise butadmirably balanced mind.
He was, I take it, the most perfectreasoning and observing machine that the world has seen, but as alover he would have placed himself in a false position.
He neverspoke of the softer passions, save with a gibe and a sneer.
Theywere admirable things for the observer--excellent for drawing theveil from men's motives and actions.
But for the trained reasonerto admit such intrusions into his own delicate and finelyadjusted temperament was to introduce a distracting factor whichmight throw a doubt upon all his mental results.
Grit in asensitive instrument, or a crack in one of his own high-powerlenses, would not be more disturbing than a strong emotion in anature such as his.
And yet there was but one woman to him, andthat woman was the late Irene Adler, of dubious and questionablememory.
I had seen little of Holmes lately.
My marriage had drifted usaway from each other.
My own complete happiness, and thehome-centred interests which rise up around the man who firstfinds himself master of his own establishment, were sufficient toabsorb all my attention, while Holmes, who loathed every form ofsociety with his whole Bohemian soul, remained in our lodgings inBaker Street, buried among his old books, and alternating fromweek to week between cocaine and ambition, the drowsiness of thedrug, and the fierce energy of his own keen nature.
He was still,as ever, deeply attracted by the study of crime, and occupied hisimmense faculties and extraordinary powers of observation infollowing out those clues, and clearing up those mysteries whichhad been abandoned as hopeless by the official police.
From timeto time I heard some vague account of his doings: of his summonsto Odessa in the case of the Trepoff murder, of his clearing upof the singular tragedy of the Atkinson brothers at Trincomalee,and finally of the mission which he had accomplished sodelicately and successfully for the reigning family of Holland.
Beyond these signs of his activity, however, which I merelyshared with all the readers of the daily press, I knew little ofmy former friend and companion.
One night--it was on the twentieth of March, 1888--I wasreturning from a journey to a patient (for I had now returned tocivil practice), when my way led me through Baker Street.
As Ipassed the well-remembered door, which must always be associatedin my mind with my wooing, and with the dark incidents of theStudy in Scarlet, I was seized with a keen desire to see Holmesagain, and to know how he was employing his extraordinary powers.
His rooms were brilliantly lit, and, even as I looked up, I sawhis tall, spare figure pass twice in a dark silhouette againstthe blind.
He was pacing the room swiftly, eagerly, with his headsunk upon his chest and his hands clasped behind him.
To me, whoknew his every mood and habit, his attitude and manner told theirown story.
He was at work again.
He had risen out of hisdrug-created dreams and was hot upon the scent of some newproblem.
I rang the bell and was shown up to the chamber whichhad formerly been in part my own.
His manner was not effusive.
It seldom was; but he was glad, Ithink, to see me.
With hardly a word spoken, but with a kindlyeye, he waved me to an armchair, threw across his case of cigars,and indicated a spirit case and a gasogene in the corner.
Then hestood before the fire and looked me over in his singularintrospective fashion.
"Wedlock suits you," he remarked.
"I think, Watson, that you haveput on seven and a half pounds since I saw you."
"Seven!"
I answered.
"Indeed, I should have thought a little more.
Just a trifle more,I fancy, Watson.
And in practice again, I observe.
You did nottell me that you intended to go into harness."
"Then, how do you know?"
"I see it, I deduce it.
How do I know that you have been gettingyourself very wet lately, and that you have a most clumsy andcareless servant girl?"
"My dear Holmes," said I, "this is too much.
You would certainlyhave been burned, had you lived a few centuries ago.
It is truethat I had a country walk on Thursday and came home in a dreadfulmess, but as I have changed my clothes I can't imagine how youdeduce it.
As to Mary Jane, she is incorrigible, and my wife hasgiven her notice, but there, again, I fail to see how you work itout."
He chuckled to himself and rubbed his long, nervous handstogether.
"It is simplicity itself," said he; "my eyes tell me that on theinside of your left shoe, just where the firelight strikes it,the leather is scored by six almost parallel cuts.
Obviously theyhave been caused by someone who has very carelessly scraped roundthe edges of the sole in order to remove crusted mud from it.
Hence, you see, my double deduction that you had been out in vileweather, and that you had a particularly malignant boot-slittingspecimen of the London slavey.
As to your practice, if agentleman walks into my rooms smelling of iodoform, with a blackmark of nitrate of silver upon his right forefinger, and a bulgeon the right side of his top-hat to show where he has secretedhis stethoscope, I must be dull, indeed, if I do not pronouncehim to be an active member of the medical profession."
I could not help laughing at the ease with which he explained hisprocess of deduction.
"When I hear you give your reasons," Iremarked, "the thing always appears to me to be so ridiculouslysimple that I could easily do it myself, though at eachsuccessive instance of your reasoning I am baffled until youexplain your process.
And yet I believe that my eyes are as goodas yours."
"Quite so," he answered, lighting a cigarette, and throwinghimself down into an armchair.
"You see, but you do not observe.
The distinction is clear.
For example, you have frequently seenthe steps which lead up from the hall to this room."
"Frequently."
"How often?"
"Well, some hundreds of times."
"Then how many are there?"
"How many?
I don't know."
"Quite so!
You have not observed.
And yet you have seen.
That isjust my point.
Now, I know that there are seventeen steps,because I have both seen and observed.
By-the-way, since you areinterested in these little problems, and since you are goodenough to chronicle one or two of my trifling experiences, youmay be interested in this."
He threw over a sheet of thick,pink-tinted note-paper which had been lying open upon the table.
"It came by the last post," said he.
"Read it aloud."
The note was undated, and without either signature or address.
"There will call upon you to-night, at a quarter to eighto'clock," it said, "a gentleman who desires to consult you upon amatter of the very deepest moment.
Your recent services to one ofthe royal houses of Europe have shown that you are one who maysafely be trusted with matters which are of an importance whichcan hardly be exaggerated.
This account of you we have from allquarters received.
Be in your chamber then at that hour, and donot take it amiss if your visitor wear a mask."
"This is indeed a mystery," I remarked.
"What do you imagine thatit means?"
"I have no data yet.
It is a capital mistake to theorize beforeone has data.
Insensibly one begins to twist facts to suittheories, instead of theories to suit facts.
But the note itself.
What do you deduce from it?"
I carefully examined the writing, and the paper upon which it waswritten.
"The man who wrote it was presumably well to do," I remarked,endeavouring to imitate my companion's processes.
"Such papercould not be bought under half a crown a packet.
It is peculiarlystrong and stiff."
"Peculiar--that is the very word," said Holmes.
"It is not anEnglish paper at all.
Hold it up to the light."
I did so, and saw a large "E" with a small "g," a "P," and alarge "G" with a small "t" woven into the texture of the paper.
"What do you make of that?"
asked Holmes.
"The name of the maker, no doubt; or his monogram, rather."
"Not at all.
The 'G' with the small 't' stands for'Gesellschaft,' which is the German for 'Company.'
It is acustomary contraction like our 'Co.'
'P,' of course, stands for'Papier.'
Now for the 'Eg.'
Let us glance at our ContinentalGazetteer."
He took down a heavy brown volume from his shelves.
"Eglow, Eglonitz--here we are, Egria.
It is in a German-speakingcountry--in Bohemia, not far from Carlsbad.
'Remarkable as beingthe scene of the death of Wallenstein, and for its numerousglass-factories and paper-mills.'
Ha, ha, my boy, what do youmake of that?"
His eyes sparkled, and he sent up a great bluetriumphant cloud from his cigarette.
"The paper was made in Bohemia," I said.
"Precisely.
And the man who wrote the note is a German.
Do younote the peculiar construction of the sentence--'This account ofyou we have from all quarters received.'
A Frenchman or Russiancould not have written that.
It is the German who is souncourteous to his verbs.
It only remains, therefore, to discoverwhat is wanted by this German who writes upon Bohemian paper andprefers wearing a mask to showing his face.
And here he comes, ifI am not mistaken, to resolve all our doubts."
As he spoke there was the sharp sound of horses' hoofs andgrating wheels against the curb, followed by a sharp pull at thebell.
Holmes whistled.
"A pair, by the sound," said he.
"Yes," he continued, glancingout of the window.
"A nice little brougham and a pair ofbeauties.
A hundred and fifty guineas apiece.
There's money inthis case, Watson, if there is nothing else."
"I think that I had better go, Holmes."
"Not a bit, Doctor.
Stay where you are.
I am lost without myBoswell.
And this promises to be interesting.
It would be a pityto miss it."
"But your client--""Never mind him.
I may want your help, and so may he.
Here hecomes.
Sit down in that armchair, Doctor, and give us your bestattention."
A slow and heavy step, which had been heard upon the stairs andin the passage, paused immediately outside the door.
Then therewas a loud and authoritative tap.
"Come in!"
said Holmes.
A man entered who could hardly have been less than six feet sixinches in height, with the chest and limbs of a Hercules.
Hisdress was rich with a richness which would, in England, be lookedupon as akin to bad taste.
Heavy bands of astrakhan were slashedacross the sleeves and fronts of his double-breasted coat, whilethe deep blue cloak which was thrown over his shoulders was linedwith flame-coloured silk and secured at the neck with a broochwhich consisted of a single flaming beryl.
Boots which extendedhalfway up his calves, and which were trimmed at the tops withrich brown fur, completed the impression of barbaric opulencewhich was suggested by his whole appearance.
He carried abroad-brimmed hat in his hand, while he wore across the upperpart of his face, extending down past the cheekbones, a blackvizard mask, which he had apparently adjusted that very moment,for his hand was still raised to it as he entered.
From the lowerpart of the face he appeared to be a man of strong character,with a thick, hanging lip, and a long, straight chin suggestiveof resolution pushed to the length of obstinacy.
"You had my note?"
he asked with a deep harsh voice and astrongly marked German accent.
"I told you that I would call."
Helooked from one to the other of us, as if uncertain which toaddress.
"Pray take a seat," said Holmes.
"This is my friend andcolleague, Dr. Watson, who is occasionally good enough to help mein my cases.
Whom have I the honour to address?"
"You may address me as the Count Von Kramm, a Bohemian nobleman.
I understand that this gentleman, your friend, is a man of honourand discretion, whom I may trust with a matter of the mostextreme importance.
If not, I should much prefer to communicatewith you alone."
I rose to go, but Holmes caught me by the wrist and pushed meback into my chair.
"It is both, or none," said he.
"You may saybefore this gentleman anything which you may say to me."
The Count shrugged his broad shoulders.
"Then I must begin," saidhe, "by binding you both to absolute secrecy for two years; atthe end of that time the matter will be of no importance.
Atpresent it is not too much to say that it is of such weight itmay have an influence upon European history."
"I promise," said Holmes.
"And I."
"You will excuse this mask," continued our strange visitor.
"Theaugust person who employs me wishes his agent to be unknown toyou, and I may confess at once that the title by which I havejust called myself is not exactly my own."
"I was aware of it," said Holmes dryly.
"The circumstances are of great delicacy, and every precautionhas to be taken to quench what might grow to be an immensescandal and seriously compromise one of the reigning families ofEurope.
To speak plainly, the matter implicates the great Houseof Ormstein, hereditary kings of Bohemia."
"I was also aware of that," murmured Holmes, settling himselfdown in his armchair and closing his eyes.
Our visitor glanced with some apparent surprise at the languid,lounging figure of the man who had been no doubt depicted to himas the most incisive reasoner and most energetic agent in Europe.
Holmes slowly reopened his eyes and looked impatiently at hisgigantic client.
"If your Majesty would condescend to state your case," heremarked, "I should be better able to advise you."
The man sprang from his chair and paced up and down the room inuncontrollable agitation.
Then, with a gesture of desperation, hetore the mask from his face and hurled it upon the ground.
"Youare right," he cried; "I am the King.
Why should I attempt toconceal it?"
"Why, indeed?"
murmured Holmes.
"Your Majesty had not spokenbefore I was aware that I was addressing Wilhelm GottsreichSigismond von Ormstein, Grand Duke of Cassel-Felstein, andhereditary King of Bohemia."
"But you can understand," said our strange visitor, sitting downonce more and passing his hand over his high white forehead, "youcan understand that I am not accustomed to doing such business inmy own person.
Yet the matter was so delicate that I could notconfide it to an agent without putting myself in his power.
Ihave come incognito from Prague for the purpose of consultingyou."
"Then, pray consult," said Holmes, shutting his eyes once more.
"The facts are briefly these: Some five years ago, during alengthy visit to Warsaw, I made the acquaintance of the well-knownadventuress, Irene Adler.
The name is no doubt familiar to you."
"Kindly look her up in my index, Doctor," murmured Holmes withoutopening his eyes.
For many years he had adopted a system ofdocketing all paragraphs concerning men and things, so that itwas difficult to name a subject or a person on which he could notat once furnish information.
In this case I found her biographysandwiched in between that of a Hebrew rabbi and that of astaff-commander who had written a monograph upon the deep-seafishes.
"Let me see!"
said Holmes.
"Hum!
Born in New Jersey in the year1858.
Contralto--hum!
La Scala, hum!
Prima donna Imperial Operaof Warsaw--yes!
Retired from operatic stage--ha!
Living inLondon--quite so!
Your Majesty, as I understand, became entangledwith this young person, wrote her some compromising letters, andis now desirous of getting those letters back."
"Precisely so.
But how--""Was there a secret marriage?"
"None."
"No legal papers or certificates?"
"None."
"Then I fail to follow your Majesty.
If this young person shouldproduce her letters for blackmailing or other purposes, how isshe to prove their authenticity?"
"There is the writing."
"Pooh, pooh!
Forgery."
"My private note-paper."
"Stolen."
"My own seal."
"Imitated."
"My photograph."
"Bought."
"We were both in the photograph."
"Oh, dear!
That is very bad!
Your Majesty has indeed committed anindiscretion."
"I was mad--insane."
"You have compromised yourself seriously."
"I was only Crown Prince then.
I was young.
I am but thirty now."
"It must be recovered."
"We have tried and failed."
"Your Majesty must pay.
It must be bought."
"She will not sell."
"Stolen, then."
"Five attempts have been made.
Twice burglars in my pay ransackedher house.
Once we diverted her luggage when she travelled.
Twiceshe has been waylaid.
There has been no result."
"No sign of it?"
"Absolutely none."
Holmes laughed.
"It is quite a pretty little problem," said he.
"But a very serious one to me," returned the King reproachfully.
"Very, indeed.
And what does she propose to do with thephotograph?"
"To ruin me."
"But how?"
"I am about to be married."
"So I have heard."
"To Clotilde Lothman von Saxe-Meningen, second daughter of theKing of Scandinavia.
You may know the strict principles of herfamily.
She is herself the very soul of delicacy.
A shadow of adoubt as to my conduct would bring the matter to an end."
"And Irene Adler?"
"Threatens to send them the photograph.
And she will do it.
Iknow that she will do it.
You do not know her, but she has a soulof steel.
She has the face of the most beautiful of women, andthe mind of the most resolute of men.
Rather than I should marryanother woman, there are no lengths to which she would notgo--none."
"You are sure that she has not sent it yet?"
"I am sure."
"And why?"
"Because she has said that she would send it on the day when thebetrothal was publicly proclaimed.
That will be next Monday."
"Oh, then we have three days yet," said Holmes with a yawn.
"Thatis very fortunate, as I have one or two matters of importance tolook into just at present.
Your Majesty will, of course, stay inLondon for the present?"
"Certainly.
You will find me at the Langham under the name of theCount Von Kramm."
"Then I shall drop you a line to let you know how we progress."
"Pray do so.
I shall be all anxiety."
"Then, as to money?"
"You have carte blanche."
"Absolutely?"
"I tell you that I would give one of the provinces of my kingdomto have that photograph."
"And for present expenses?"
The King took a heavy chamois leather bag from under his cloakand laid it on the table.
"There are three hundred pounds in gold and seven hundred innotes," he said.
Holmes scribbled a receipt upon a sheet of his note-book andhanded it to him.
"And Mademoiselle's address?"
he asked.
"Is Briony Lodge, Serpentine Avenue, St. John's Wood."
Holmes took a note of it.
"One other question," said he.
"Was thephotograph a cabinet?"
"It was."
"Then, good-night, your Majesty, and I trust that we shall soonhave some good news for you.
And good-night, Watson," he added,as the wheels of the royal brougham rolled down the street.
"Ifyou will be good enough to call to-morrow afternoon at threeo'clock I should like to chat this little matter over with you."
II.
At three o'clock precisely I was at Baker Street, but Holmes hadnot yet returned.
The landlady informed me that he had left thehouse shortly after eight o'clock in the morning.
I sat downbeside the fire, however, with the intention of awaiting him,however long he might be.
I was already deeply interested in hisinquiry, for, though it was surrounded by none of the grim andstrange features which were associated with the two crimes whichI have already recorded, still, the nature of the case and theexalted station of his client gave it a character of its own.
Indeed, apart from the nature of the investigation which myfriend had on hand, there was something in his masterly grasp ofa situation, and his keen, incisive reasoning, which made it apleasure to me to study his system of work, and to follow thequick, subtle methods by which he disentangled the mostinextricable mysteries.
So accustomed was I to his invariablesuccess that the very possibility of his failing had ceased toenter into my head.
It was close upon four before the door opened, and adrunken-looking groom, ill-kempt and side-whiskered, with aninflamed face and disreputable clothes, walked into the room.
Accustomed as I was to my friend's amazing powers in the use ofdisguises, I had to look three times before I was certain that itwas indeed he.
With a nod he vanished into the bedroom, whence heemerged in five minutes tweed-suited and respectable, as of old.
Putting his hands into his pockets, he stretched out his legs infront of the fire and laughed heartily for some minutes.
"Well, really!"
he cried, and then he choked and laughed againuntil he was obliged to lie back, limp and helpless, in thechair.
"What is it?"
"It's quite too funny.
I am sure you could never guess how Iemployed my morning, or what I ended by doing."
"I can't imagine.
I suppose that you have been watching thehabits, and perhaps the house, of Miss Irene Adler."
"Quite so; but the sequel was rather unusual.
I will tell you,however.
I left the house a little after eight o'clock thismorning in the character of a groom out of work.
There is awonderful sympathy and freemasonry among horsey men.
Be one ofthem, and you will know all that there is to know.
I soon foundBriony Lodge.
It is a bijou villa, with a garden at the back, butbuilt out in front right up to the road, two stories.
Chubb lockto the door.
Large sitting-room on the right side, wellfurnished, with long windows almost to the floor, and thosepreposterous English window fasteners which a child could open.
Behind there was nothing remarkable, save that the passage windowcould be reached from the top of the coach-house.
I walked roundit and examined it closely from every point of view, but withoutnoting anything else of interest.
"I then lounged down the street and found, as I expected, thatthere was a mews in a lane which runs down by one wall of thegarden.
I lent the ostlers a hand in rubbing down their horses,and received in exchange twopence, a glass of half and half, twofills of shag tobacco, and as much information as I could desireabout Miss Adler, to say nothing of half a dozen other people inthe neighbourhood in whom I was not in the least interested, butwhose biographies I was compelled to listen to."
"And what of Irene Adler?"
I asked.
"Oh, she has turned all the men's heads down in that part.
She isthe daintiest thing under a bonnet on this planet.
So say theSerpentine-mews, to a man.
She lives quietly, sings at concerts,drives out at five every day, and returns at seven sharp fordinner.
Seldom goes out at other times, except when she sings.
Has only one male visitor, but a good deal of him.
He is dark,handsome, and dashing, never calls less than once a day, andoften twice.
He is a Mr. Godfrey Norton, of the Inner Temple.
Seethe advantages of a cabman as a confidant.
They had driven himhome a dozen times from Serpentine-mews, and knew all about him.
When I had listened to all they had to tell, I began to walk upand down near Briony Lodge once more, and to think over my planof campaign.
"This Godfrey Norton was evidently an important factor in thematter.
He was a lawyer.
That sounded ominous.
What was therelation between them, and what the object of his repeatedvisits?
Was she his client, his friend, or his mistress?
If theformer, she had probably transferred the photograph to hiskeeping.
If the latter, it was less likely.
On the issue of thisquestion depended whether I should continue my work at BrionyLodge, or turn my attention to the gentleman's chambers in theTemple.
It was a delicate point, and it widened the field of myinquiry.
I fear that I bore you with these details, but I have tolet you see my little difficulties, if you are to understand thesituation."
"I am following you closely," I answered.
"I was still balancing the matter in my mind when a hansom cabdrove up to Briony Lodge, and a gentleman sprang out.
He was aremarkably handsome man, dark, aquiline, and moustached--evidentlythe man of whom I had heard.
He appeared to be in agreat hurry, shouted to the cabman to wait, and brushed past themaid who opened the door with the air of a man who was thoroughlyat home.
"He was in the house about half an hour, and I could catchglimpses of him in the windows of the sitting-room, pacing up anddown, talking excitedly, and waving his arms.
Of her I could seenothing.
Presently he emerged, looking even more flurried thanbefore.
As he stepped up to the cab, he pulled a gold watch fromhis pocket and looked at it earnestly, 'Drive like the devil,' heshouted, 'first to Gross & Hankey's in Regent Street, and then tothe Church of St. Monica in the Edgeware Road.
Half a guinea ifyou do it in twenty minutes!'
"Away they went, and I was just wondering whether I should not dowell to follow them when up the lane came a neat little landau,the coachman with his coat only half-buttoned, and his tie underhis ear, while all the tags of his harness were sticking out ofthe buckles.
It hadn't pulled up before she shot out of the halldoor and into it.
I only caught a glimpse of her at the moment,but she was a lovely woman, with a face that a man might die for.
"'The Church of St. Monica, John,' she cried, 'and half asovereign if you reach it in twenty minutes.'
"This was quite too good to lose, Watson.
I was just balancingwhether I should run for it, or whether I should perch behind herlandau when a cab came through the street.
The driver lookedtwice at such a shabby fare, but I jumped in before he couldobject.
'The Church of St. Monica,' said I, 'and half a sovereignif you reach it in twenty minutes.'
It was twenty-five minutes totwelve, and of course it was clear enough what was in the wind.
"My cabby drove fast.
I don't think I ever drove faster, but theothers were there before us.
The cab and the landau with theirsteaming horses were in front of the door when I arrived.
I paidthe man and hurried into the church.
There was not a soul theresave the two whom I had followed and a surpliced clergyman, whoseemed to be expostulating with them.
They were all threestanding in a knot in front of the altar.
I lounged up the sideaisle like any other idler who has dropped into a church.
Suddenly, to my surprise, the three at the altar faced round tome, and Godfrey Norton came running as hard as he could towardsme.
"'Thank God,' he cried.
'You'll do.
Come!
Come!'
"'What then?'
I asked.
"'Come, man, come, only three minutes, or it won't be legal.'
"I was half-dragged up to the altar, and before I knew where I wasI found myself mumbling responses which were whispered in my ear,and vouching for things of which I knew nothing, and generallyassisting in the secure tying up of Irene Adler, spinster, toGodfrey Norton, bachelor.
It was all done in an instant, andthere was the gentleman thanking me on the one side and the ladyon the other, while the clergyman beamed on me in front.
It wasthe most preposterous position in which I ever found myself in mylife, and it was the thought of it that started me laughing justnow.
It seems that there had been some informality about theirlicense, that the clergyman absolutely refused to marry themwithout a witness of some sort, and that my lucky appearancesaved the bridegroom from having to sally out into the streets insearch of a best man.
The bride gave me a sovereign, and I meanto wear it on my watch-chain in memory of the occasion."
"This is a very unexpected turn of affairs," said I; "and whatthen?"
"Well, I found my plans very seriously menaced.
It looked as ifthe pair might take an immediate departure, and so necessitatevery prompt and energetic measures on my part.
At the churchdoor, however, they separated, he driving back to the Temple, andshe to her own house.
'I shall drive out in the park at five asusual,' she said as she left him.
I heard no more.
They droveaway in different directions, and I went off to make my ownarrangements."
"Which are?"
"Some cold beef and a glass of beer," he answered, ringing thebell.
"I have been too busy to think of food, and I am likely tobe busier still this evening.
By the way, Doctor, I shall wantyour co-operation."
"I shall be delighted."
"You don't mind breaking the law?"
"Not in the least."
"Nor running a chance of arrest?"
"Not in a good cause."
"Oh, the cause is excellent!"
"Then I am your man."
"I was sure that I might rely on you."
"But what is it you wish?"
"When Mrs. Turner has brought in the tray I will make it clear toyou.
Now," he said as he turned hungrily on the simple fare thatour landlady had provided, "I must discuss it while I eat, for Ihave not much time.
It is nearly five now.
In two hours we mustbe on the scene of action.
Miss Irene, or Madame, rather, returnsfrom her drive at seven.
We must be at Briony Lodge to meet her."
"And what then?"
"You must leave that to me.
I have already arranged what is tooccur.
There is only one point on which I must insist.
You mustnot interfere, come what may.
You understand?"
"I am to be neutral?"
"To do nothing whatever.
There will probably be some smallunpleasantness.
Do not join in it.
It will end in my beingconveyed into the house.
Four or five minutes afterwards thesitting-room window will open.
You are to station yourself closeto that open window."
"Yes."
"You are to watch me, for I will be visible to you."
"Yes."
"And when I raise my hand--so--you will throw into the room whatI give you to throw, and will, at the same time, raise the cry offire.
You quite follow me?"
"Entirely."
"It is nothing very formidable," he said, taking a long cigar-shapedroll from his pocket.
"It is an ordinary plumber's smoke-rocket,fitted with a cap at either end to make it self-lighting.
Your task is confined to that.
When you raise your cry of fire,it will be taken up by quite a number of people.
You may thenwalk to the end of the street, and I will rejoin you in tenminutes.
I hope that I have made myself clear?"
"I am to remain neutral, to get near the window, to watch you,and at the signal to throw in this object, then to raise the cryof fire, and to wait you at the corner of the street."
"Precisely."
"Then you may entirely rely on me."
"That is excellent.
I think, perhaps, it is almost time that Iprepare for the new role I have to play."
He disappeared into his bedroom and returned in a few minutes inthe character of an amiable and simple-minded Nonconformistclergyman.
His broad black hat, his baggy trousers, his whitetie, his sympathetic smile, and general look of peering andbenevolent curiosity were such as Mr. John Hare alone could haveequalled.
It was not merely that Holmes changed his costume.
Hisexpression, his manner, his very soul seemed to vary with everyfresh part that he assumed.
The stage lost a fine actor, even asscience lost an acute reasoner, when he became a specialist incrime.
It was a quarter past six when we left Baker Street, and it stillwanted ten minutes to the hour when we found ourselves inSerpentine Avenue.
It was already dusk, and the lamps were justbeing lighted as we paced up and down in front of Briony Lodge,waiting for the coming of its occupant.
The house was just suchas I had pictured it from Sherlock Holmes' succinct description,but the locality appeared to be less private than I expected.
Onthe contrary, for a small street in a quiet neighbourhood, it wasremarkably animated.
There was a group of shabbily dressed mensmoking and laughing in a corner, a scissors-grinder with hiswheel, two guardsmen who were flirting with a nurse-girl, andseveral well-dressed young men who were lounging up and down withcigars in their mouths.
"You see," remarked Holmes, as we paced to and fro in front ofthe house, "this marriage rather simplifies matters.
Thephotograph becomes a double-edged weapon now.
The chances arethat she would be as averse to its being seen by Mr. GodfreyNorton, as our client is to its coming to the eyes of hisprincess.
Now the question is, Where are we to find thephotograph?"
"Where, indeed?"
"It is most unlikely that she carries it about with her.
It iscabinet size.
Too large for easy concealment about a woman'sdress.
She knows that the King is capable of having her waylaidand searched.
Two attempts of the sort have already been made.
Wemay take it, then, that she does not carry it about with her."
"Where, then?"
"Her banker or her lawyer.
There is that double possibility.
ButI am inclined to think neither.
Women are naturally secretive,and they like to do their own secreting.
Why should she hand itover to anyone else?
She could trust her own guardianship, butshe could not tell what indirect or political influence might bebrought to bear upon a business man.
Besides, remember that shehad resolved to use it within a few days.
It must be where shecan lay her hands upon it.
It must be in her own house."
"But it has twice been burgled."
"Pshaw!
They did not know how to look."
"But how will you look?"
"I will not look."
"What then?"
"I will get her to show me."
"But she will refuse."
"She will not be able to.
But I hear the rumble of wheels.
It isher carriage.
Now carry out my orders to the letter."
As he spoke the gleam of the side-lights of a carriage came roundthe curve of the avenue.
It was a smart little landau whichrattled up to the door of Briony Lodge.
As it pulled up, one ofthe loafing men at the corner dashed forward to open the door inthe hope of earning a copper, but was elbowed away by anotherloafer, who had rushed up with the same intention.
A fiercequarrel broke out, which was increased by the two guardsmen, whotook sides with one of the loungers, and by the scissors-grinder,who was equally hot upon the other side.
A blow was struck, andin an instant the lady, who had stepped from her carriage, wasthe centre of a little knot of flushed and struggling men, whostruck savagely at each other with their fists and sticks.
Holmesdashed into the crowd to protect the lady; but just as he reachedher he gave a cry and dropped to the ground, with the bloodrunning freely down his face.
At his fall the guardsmen took totheir heels in one direction and the loungers in the other, whilea number of better-dressed people, who had watched the scufflewithout taking part in it, crowded in to help the lady and toattend to the injured man.
Irene Adler, as I will still call her,had hurried up the steps; but she stood at the top with hersuperb figure outlined against the lights of the hall, lookingback into the street.
"Is the poor gentleman much hurt?"
she asked.
"He is dead," cried several voices.
"No, no, there's life in him!"
shouted another.
"But he'll begone before you can get him to hospital."
"He's a brave fellow," said a woman.
"They would have had thelady's purse and watch if it hadn't been for him.
They were agang, and a rough one, too.
Ah, he's breathing now."
"He can't lie in the street.
May we bring him in, marm?"
"Surely.
Bring him into the sitting-room.
There is a comfortablesofa.
This way, please!"
Slowly and solemnly he was borne into Briony Lodge and laid outin the principal room, while I still observed the proceedingsfrom my post by the window.
The lamps had been lit, but theblinds had not been drawn, so that I could see Holmes as he layupon the couch.
I do not know whether he was seized withcompunction at that moment for the part he was playing, but Iknow that I never felt more heartily ashamed of myself in my lifethan when I saw the beautiful creature against whom I wasconspiring, or the grace and kindliness with which she waitedupon the injured man.
And yet it would be the blackest treacheryto Holmes to draw back now from the part which he had intrustedto me.
I hardened my heart, and took the smoke-rocket from undermy ulster.
After all, I thought, we are not injuring her.
We arebut preventing her from injuring another.
Holmes had sat up upon the couch, and I saw him motion like a manwho is in need of air.
A maid rushed across and threw open thewindow.
At the same instant I saw him raise his hand and at thesignal I tossed my rocket into the room with a cry of "Fire!"
Theword was no sooner out of my mouth than the whole crowd ofspectators, well dressed and ill--gentlemen, ostlers, andservant-maids--joined in a general shriek of "Fire!"
Thick cloudsof smoke curled through the room and out at the open window.
Icaught a glimpse of rushing figures, and a moment later the voiceof Holmes from within assuring them that it was a false alarm.
Slipping through the shouting crowd I made my way to the cornerof the street, and in ten minutes was rejoiced to find myfriend's arm in mine, and to get away from the scene of uproar.
He walked swiftly and in silence for some few minutes until wehad turned down one of the quiet streets which lead towards theEdgeware Road.
"You did it very nicely, Doctor," he remarked.
"Nothing couldhave been better.
It is all right."
"You have the photograph?"
"I know where it is."
"And how did you find out?"
"She showed me, as I told you she would."
"I am still in the dark."
"I do not wish to make a mystery," said he, laughing.
"The matterwas perfectly simple.
You, of course, saw that everyone in thestreet was an accomplice.
They were all engaged for the evening."
"I guessed as much."
"Then, when the row broke out, I had a little moist red paint inthe palm of my hand.
I rushed forward, fell down, clapped my handto my face, and became a piteous spectacle.
It is an old trick."
"That also I could fathom."
"Then they carried me in.
She was bound to have me in.
What elsecould she do?
And into her sitting-room, which was the very roomwhich I suspected.
It lay between that and her bedroom, and I wasdetermined to see which.
They laid me on a couch, I motioned forair, they were compelled to open the window, and you had yourchance."
"How did that help you?"
"It was all-important.
When a woman thinks that her house is onfire, her instinct is at once to rush to the thing which shevalues most.
It is a perfectly overpowering impulse, and I havemore than once taken advantage of it.
In the case of theDarlington substitution scandal it was of use to me, and also inthe Arnsworth Castle business.
A married woman grabs at her baby;an unmarried one reaches for her jewel-box.
Now it was clear tome that our lady of to-day had nothing in the house more preciousto her than what we are in quest of.
She would rush to secure it.
The alarm of fire was admirably done.
The smoke and shouting wereenough to shake nerves of steel.
She responded beautifully.
Thephotograph is in a recess behind a sliding panel just above theright bell-pull.
She was there in an instant, and I caught aglimpse of it as she half-drew it out.
When I cried out that itwas a false alarm, she replaced it, glanced at the rocket, rushedfrom the room, and I have not seen her since.
I rose, and, makingmy excuses, escaped from the house.
I hesitated whether toattempt to secure the photograph at once; but the coachman hadcome in, and as he was watching me narrowly it seemed safer towait.
A little over-precipitance may ruin all."
"And now?"
I asked.
"Our quest is practically finished.
I shall call with the Kingto-morrow, and with you, if you care to come with us.
We will beshown into the sitting-room to wait for the lady, but it isprobable that when she comes she may find neither us nor thephotograph.
It might be a satisfaction to his Majesty to regainit with his own hands."
"And when will you call?"
"At eight in the morning.
She will not be up, so that we shallhave a clear field.
Besides, we must be prompt, for this marriagemay mean a complete change in her life and habits.
I must wire tothe King without delay."
We had reached Baker Street and had stopped at the door.
He wassearching his pockets for the key when someone passing said:"Good-night, Mister Sherlock Holmes."
There were several people on the pavement at the time, but thegreeting appeared to come from a slim youth in an ulster who hadhurried by.
"I've heard that voice before," said Holmes, staring down thedimly lit street.
"Now, I wonder who the deuce that could havebeen."
III.
I slept at Baker Street that night, and we were engaged upon ourtoast and coffee in the morning when the King of Bohemia rushedinto the room.
"You have really got it!"
he cried, grasping Sherlock Holmes byeither shoulder and looking eagerly into his face.
"Not yet."
"But you have hopes?"
"I have hopes."
"Then, come.
I am all impatience to be gone."
"We must have a cab."
"No, my brougham is waiting."
"Then that will simplify matters."
We descended and started offonce more for Briony Lodge.
"Irene Adler is married," remarked Holmes.
"Married!
When?"
"Yesterday."
"But to whom?"
"To an English lawyer named Norton."
"But she could not love him."
"I am in hopes that she does."
"And why in hopes?"
"Because it would spare your Majesty all fear of futureannoyance.
If the lady loves her husband, she does not love yourMajesty.
If she does not love your Majesty, there is no reasonwhy she should interfere with your Majesty's plan."
"It is true.
And yet--Well!
I wish she had been of my ownstation!
What a queen she would have made!"
He relapsed into amoody silence, which was not broken until we drew up inSerpentine Avenue.
The door of Briony Lodge was open, and an elderly woman stoodupon the steps.
She watched us with a sardonic eye as we steppedfrom the brougham.
"Mr. Sherlock Holmes, I believe?"
said she.
"I am Mr. Holmes," answered my companion, looking at her with aquestioning and rather startled gaze.
"Indeed!
My mistress told me that you were likely to call.
Sheleft this morning with her husband by the 5:15 train from CharingCross for the Continent."
"What!"
Sherlock Holmes staggered back, white with chagrin andsurprise.
"Do you mean that she has left England?"
"Never to return."
"And the papers?"
asked the King hoarsely.
"All is lost."
"We shall see."
He pushed past the servant and rushed into thedrawing-room, followed by the King and myself.
The furniture wasscattered about in every direction, with dismantled shelves andopen drawers, as if the lady had hurriedly ransacked them beforeher flight.
Holmes rushed at the bell-pull, tore back a smallsliding shutter, and, plunging in his hand, pulled out aphotograph and a letter.
The photograph was of Irene Adlerherself in evening dress, the letter was superscribed to"Sherlock Holmes, Esq.
To be left till called for."
My friendtore it open and we all three read it together.
It was dated atmidnight of the preceding night and ran in this way:"MY DEAR MR. SHERLOCK HOLMES,--You really did it very well.
Youtook me in completely.
Until after the alarm of fire, I had not asuspicion.
But then, when I found how I had betrayed myself, Ibegan to think.
I had been warned against you months ago.
I hadbeen told that if the King employed an agent it would certainlybe you.
And your address had been given me.
Yet, with all this,you made me reveal what you wanted to know.
Even after I becamesuspicious, I found it hard to think evil of such a dear, kindold clergyman.
But, you know, I have been trained as an actressmyself.
Male costume is nothing new to me.
I often take advantageof the freedom which it gives.
I sent John, the coachman, towatch you, ran up stairs, got into my walking-clothes, as I callthem, and came down just as you departed.
"Well, I followed you to your door, and so made sure that I wasreally an object of interest to the celebrated Mr. SherlockHolmes.
Then I, rather imprudently, wished you good-night, andstarted for the Temple to see my husband.
"We both thought the best resource was flight, when pursued byso formidable an antagonist; so you will find the nest empty whenyou call to-morrow.
As to the photograph, your client may rest inpeace.
I love and am loved by a better man than he.
The King maydo what he will without hindrance from one whom he has cruellywronged.
I keep it only to safeguard myself, and to preserve aweapon which will always secure me from any steps which he mighttake in the future.
I leave a photograph which he might care topossess; and I remain, dear Mr. Sherlock Holmes,                                      "Very truly yours,                                   "IRENE NORTON, née ADLER."
"What a woman--oh, what a woman!"
cried the King of Bohemia, whenwe had all three read this epistle.
"Did I not tell you how quickand resolute she was?
Would she not have made an admirable queen?
Is it not a pity that she was not on my level?"
"From what I have seen of the lady she seems indeed to be on avery different level to your Majesty," said Holmes coldly.
"I amsorry that I have not been able to bring your Majesty's businessto a more successful conclusion."
"On the contrary, my dear sir," cried the King; "nothing could bemore successful.
I know that her word is inviolate.
Thephotograph is now as safe as if it were in the fire."
"I am glad to hear your Majesty say so."
"I am immensely indebted to you.
Pray tell me in what way I canreward you.
This ring--" He slipped an emerald snake ring fromhis finger and held it out upon the palm of his hand.
"Your Majesty has something which I should value even morehighly," said Holmes.
"You have but to name it."
"This photograph!"
The King stared at him in amazement.
"Irene's photograph!"
he cried.
"Certainly, if you wish it."
"I thank your Majesty.
Then there is no more to be done in thematter.
I have the honour to wish you a very good-morning."
Hebowed, and, turning away without observing the hand which theKing had stretched out to him, he set off in my company for hischambers.
And that was how a great scandal threatened to affect the kingdomof Bohemia, and how the best plans of Mr. Sherlock Holmes werebeaten by a woman's wit.
He used to make merry over thecleverness of women, but I have not heard him do it of late.
Andwhen he speaks of Irene Adler, or when he refers to herphotograph, it is always under the honourable title of the woman.
ADVENTURE II.
THE RED-HEADED LEAGUEI had called upon my friend, Mr. Sherlock Holmes, one day in theautumn of last year and found him in deep conversation with avery stout, florid-faced, elderly gentleman with fiery red hair.
With an apology for my intrusion, I was about to withdraw whenHolmes pulled me abruptly into the room and closed the doorbehind me.
"You could not possibly have come at a better time, my dearWatson," he said cordially.
"I was afraid that you were engaged."
"So I am.
Very much so."
"Then I can wait in the next room."
"Not at all.
This gentleman, Mr. Wilson, has been my partner andhelper in many of my most successful cases, and I have nodoubt that he will be of the utmost use to me in yours also."
The stout gentleman half rose from his chair and gave a bob ofgreeting, with a quick little questioning glance from his smallfat-encircled eyes.
"Try the settee," said Holmes, relapsing into his armchair andputting his fingertips together, as was his custom when injudicial moods.
"I know, my dear Watson, that you share my loveof all that is bizarre and outside the conventions and humdrumroutine of everyday life.
You have shown your relish for it bythe enthusiasm which has prompted you to chronicle, and, if youwill excuse my saying so, somewhat to embellish so many of my ownlittle adventures."
"Your cases have indeed been of the greatest interest to me," Iobserved.
"You will remember that I remarked the other day, just before wewent into the very simple problem presented by Miss MarySutherland, that for strange effects and extraordinarycombinations we must go to life itself, which is always far moredaring than any effort of the imagination."
"A proposition which I took the liberty of doubting."
"You did, Doctor, but none the less you must come round to myview, for otherwise I shall keep on piling fact upon fact on youuntil your reason breaks down under them and acknowledges me tobe right.
Now, Mr. Jabez Wilson here has been good enough to callupon me this morning, and to begin a narrative which promises tobe one of the most singular which I have listened to for sometime.
You have heard me remark that the strangest and most uniquethings are very often connected not with the larger but with thesmaller crimes, and occasionally, indeed, where there is room fordoubt whether any positive crime has been committed.
As far as Ihave heard it is impossible for me to say whether the presentcase is an instance of crime or not, but the course of events iscertainly among the most singular that I have ever listened to.
Perhaps, Mr. Wilson, you would have the great kindness torecommence your narrative.
I ask you not merely because my friendDr. Watson has not heard the opening part but also because thepeculiar nature of the story makes me anxious to have everypossible detail from your lips.
As a rule, when I have heard someslight indication of the course of events, I am able to guidemyself by the thousands of other similar cases which occur to mymemory.
In the present instance I am forced to admit that thefacts are, to the best of my belief, unique."
The portly client puffed out his chest with an appearance of somelittle pride and pulled a dirty and wrinkled newspaper from theinside pocket of his greatcoat.
As he glanced down theadvertisement column, with his head thrust forward and the paperflattened out upon his knee, I took a good look at the man andendeavoured, after the fashion of my companion, to read theindications which might be presented by his dress or appearance.
I did not gain very much, however, by my inspection.
Our visitorbore every mark of being an average commonplace Britishtradesman, obese, pompous, and slow.
He wore rather baggy greyshepherd's check trousers, a not over-clean black frock-coat,unbuttoned in the front, and a drab waistcoat with a heavy brassyAlbert chain, and a square pierced bit of metal dangling down asan ornament.
A frayed top-hat and a faded brown overcoat with awrinkled velvet collar lay upon a chair beside him.
Altogether,look as I would, there was nothing remarkable about the man savehis blazing red head, and the expression of extreme chagrin anddiscontent upon his features.
Sherlock Holmes' quick eye took in my occupation, and he shookhis head with a smile as he noticed my questioning glances.
"Beyond the obvious facts that he has at some time done manuallabour, that he takes snuff, that he is a Freemason, that he hasbeen in China, and that he has done a considerable amount ofwriting lately, I can deduce nothing else."
Mr. Jabez Wilson started up in his chair, with his forefingerupon the paper, but his eyes upon my companion.
"How, in the name of good-fortune, did you know all that, Mr.
Holmes?"
he asked.
"How did you know, for example, that I didmanual labour.
It's as true as gospel, for I began as a ship'scarpenter."
"Your hands, my dear sir.
Your right hand is quite a size largerthan your left.
You have worked with it, and the muscles are moredeveloped."
"Well, the snuff, then, and the Freemasonry?"
"I won't insult your intelligence by telling you how I read that,especially as, rather against the strict rules of your order, youuse an arc-and-compass breastpin."
"Ah, of course, I forgot that.
But the writing?"
"What else can be indicated by that right cuff so very shiny forfive inches, and the left one with the smooth patch near theelbow where you rest it upon the desk?"
"Well, but China?"
"The fish that you have tattooed immediately above your rightwrist could only have been done in China.
I have made a smallstudy of tattoo marks and have even contributed to the literatureof the subject.
That trick of staining the fishes' scales of adelicate pink is quite peculiar to China.
When, in addition, Isee a Chinese coin hanging from your watch-chain, the matterbecomes even more simple."
Mr. Jabez Wilson laughed heavily.
"Well, I never!"
said he.
"Ithought at first that you had done something clever, but I seethat there was nothing in it, after all."
"I begin to think, Watson," said Holmes, "that I make a mistakein explaining.
'Omne ignotum pro magnifico,' you know, and mypoor little reputation, such as it is, will suffer shipwreck if Iam so candid.
Can you not find the advertisement, Mr.
Wilson?"
"Yes, I have got it now," he answered with his thick red fingerplanted halfway down the column.
"Here it is.
This is what beganit all.
You just read it for yourself, sir."
I took the paper from him and read as follows:"TO THE RED-HEADED LEAGUE: On account of the bequest of the lateEzekiah Hopkins, of Lebanon, Pennsylvania, U. S. A., there is nowanother vacancy open which entitles a member of the League to asalary of 4 pounds a week for purely nominal services.
Allred-headed men who are sound in body and mind and above the ageof twenty-one years, are eligible.
Apply in person on Monday, ateleven o'clock, to Duncan Ross, at the offices of the League, 7Pope's Court, Fleet Street."
"What on earth does this mean?"
I ejaculated after I had twiceread over the extraordinary announcement.
Holmes chuckled and wriggled in his chair, as was his habit whenin high spirits.
"It is a little off the beaten track, isn't it?"
said he.
"And now, Mr. Wilson, off you go at scratch and tell usall about yourself, your household, and the effect which thisadvertisement had upon your fortunes.
You will first make a note,Doctor, of the paper and the date."
"It is The Morning Chronicle of April 27, 1890.
Just two monthsago."
"Very good.
Now, Mr.
Wilson?"
"Well, it is just as I have been telling you, Mr. SherlockHolmes," said Jabez Wilson, mopping his forehead; "I have a smallpawnbroker's business at Coburg Square, near the City.
It's not avery large affair, and of late years it has not done more thanjust give me a living.
I used to be able to keep two assistants,but now I only keep one; and I would have a job to pay him butthat he is willing to come for half wages so as to learn thebusiness."
"What is the name of this obliging youth?"
asked Sherlock Holmes.
"His name is Vincent Spaulding, and he's not such a youth,either.
It's hard to say his age.
I should not wish a smarterassistant, Mr. Holmes; and I know very well that he could betterhimself and earn twice what I am able to give him.
But, afterall, if he is satisfied, why should I put ideas in his head?"
"Why, indeed?
You seem most fortunate in having an employé whocomes under the full market price.
It is not a common experienceamong employers in this age.
I don't know that your assistant isnot as remarkable as your advertisement."
"Oh, he has his faults, too," said Mr. Wilson.
"Never was such afellow for photography.
Snapping away with a camera when he oughtto be improving his mind, and then diving down into the cellarlike a rabbit into its hole to develop his pictures.
That is hismain fault, but on the whole he's a good worker.
There's no vicein him."
"He is still with you, I presume?"
"Yes, sir.
He and a girl of fourteen, who does a bit of simplecooking and keeps the place clean--that's all I have in thehouse, for I am a widower and never had any family.
We live veryquietly, sir, the three of us; and we keep a roof over our headsand pay our debts, if we do nothing more.
"The first thing that put us out was that advertisement.
Spaulding, he came down into the office just this day eightweeks, with this very paper in his hand, and he says:"'I wish to the Lord, Mr. Wilson, that I was a red-headed man.'
"'Why that?'
I asks.
"'Why,' says he, 'here's another vacancy on the League of theRed-headed Men.
It's worth quite a little fortune to any man whogets it, and I understand that there are more vacancies thanthere are men, so that the trustees are at their wits' end whatto do with the money.
If my hair would only change colour, here'sa nice little crib all ready for me to step into.'
"'Why, what is it, then?'
I asked.
You see, Mr. Holmes, I am avery stay-at-home man, and as my business came to me instead ofmy having to go to it, I was often weeks on end without puttingmy foot over the door-mat.
In that way I didn't know much of whatwas going on outside, and I was always glad of a bit of news.
"'Have you never heard of the League of the Red-headed Men?'
heasked with his eyes open.
"'Never.'
"'Why, I wonder at that, for you are eligible yourself for oneof the vacancies.'
"'And what are they worth?'
I asked.
"'Oh, merely a couple of hundred a year, but the work is slight,and it need not interfere very much with one's otheroccupations.'
"Well, you can easily think that that made me prick up my ears,for the business has not been over-good for some years, and anextra couple of hundred would have been very handy.
"'Tell me all about it,' said I.
"'Well,' said he, showing me the advertisement, 'you can see foryourself that the League has a vacancy, and there is the addresswhere you should apply for particulars.
As far as I can make out,the League was founded by an American millionaire, EzekiahHopkins, who was very peculiar in his ways.
He was himselfred-headed, and he had a great sympathy for all red-headed men;so when he died it was found that he had left his enormousfortune in the hands of trustees, with instructions to apply theinterest to the providing of easy berths to men whose hair is ofthat colour.
From all I hear it is splendid pay and very little todo.'
"'But,' said I, 'there would be millions of red-headed men whowould apply.'
"'Not so many as you might think,' he answered.
'You see it isreally confined to Londoners, and to grown men.
This American hadstarted from London when he was young, and he wanted to do theold town a good turn.
Then, again, I have heard it is no use yourapplying if your hair is light red, or dark red, or anything butreal bright, blazing, fiery red.
Now, if you cared to apply, Mr.Wilson, you would just walk in; but perhaps it would hardly beworth your while to put yourself out of the way for the sake of afew hundred pounds.'
"Now, it is a fact, gentlemen, as you may see for yourselves,that my hair is of a very full and rich tint, so that it seemedto me that if there was to be any competition in the matter Istood as good a chance as any man that I had ever met.
VincentSpaulding seemed to know so much about it that I thought he mightprove useful, so I just ordered him to put up the shutters forthe day and to come right away with me.
He was very willing tohave a holiday, so we shut the business up and started off forthe address that was given us in the advertisement.
"I never hope to see such a sight as that again, Mr. Holmes.
Fromnorth, south, east, and west every man who had a shade of red inhis hair had tramped into the city to answer the advertisement.
Fleet Street was choked with red-headed folk, and Pope's Courtlooked like a coster's orange barrow.
I should not have thoughtthere were so many in the whole country as were brought togetherby that single advertisement.
Every shade of colour theywere--straw, lemon, orange, brick, Irish-setter, liver, clay;but, as Spaulding said, there were not many who had the realvivid flame-coloured tint.
When I saw how many were waiting, Iwould have given it up in despair; but Spaulding would not hearof it.
How he did it I could not imagine, but he pushed andpulled and butted until he got me through the crowd, and right upto the steps which led to the office.
There was a double streamupon the stair, some going up in hope, and some coming backdejected; but we wedged in as well as we could and soon foundourselves in the office."
"Your experience has been a most entertaining one," remarkedHolmes as his client paused and refreshed his memory with a hugepinch of snuff.
"Pray continue your very interesting statement."
"There was nothing in the office but a couple of wooden chairsand a deal table, behind which sat a small man with a head thatwas even redder than mine.
He said a few words to each candidateas he came up, and then he always managed to find some fault inthem which would disqualify them.
Getting a vacancy did not seemto be such a very easy matter, after all.
However, when our turncame the little man was much more favourable to me than to any ofthe others, and he closed the door as we entered, so that hemight have a private word with us.
"'This is Mr. Jabez Wilson,' said my assistant, 'and he iswilling to fill a vacancy in the League.'
"'And he is admirably suited for it,' the other answered.
'He hasevery requirement.
I cannot recall when I have seen anything sofine.'
He took a step backward, cocked his head on one side, andgazed at my hair until I felt quite bashful.
Then suddenly heplunged forward, wrung my hand, and congratulated me warmly on mysuccess.
"'It would be injustice to hesitate,' said he.
'You will,however, I am sure, excuse me for taking an obvious precaution.'
With that he seized my hair in both his hands, and tugged until Iyelled with the pain.
'There is water in your eyes,' said he ashe released me.
'I perceive that all is as it should be.
But wehave to be careful, for we have twice been deceived by wigs andonce by paint.
I could tell you tales of cobbler's wax whichwould disgust you with human nature.'
He stepped over to thewindow and shouted through it at the top of his voice that thevacancy was filled.
A groan of disappointment came up from below,and the folk all trooped away in different directions until therewas not a red-head to be seen except my own and that of themanager.
"'My name,' said he, 'is Mr. Duncan Ross, and I am myself one ofthe pensioners upon the fund left by our noble benefactor.
Areyou a married man, Mr. Wilson?
Have you a family?'
"I answered that I had not.
"His face fell immediately.
"'Dear me!'
he said gravely, 'that is very serious indeed!
I amsorry to hear you say that.
The fund was, of course, for thepropagation and spread of the red-heads as well as for theirmaintenance.
It is exceedingly unfortunate that you should be abachelor.'
"My face lengthened at this, Mr. Holmes, for I thought that I wasnot to have the vacancy after all; but after thinking it over fora few minutes he said that it would be all right.
"'In the case of another,' said he, 'the objection might befatal, but we must stretch a point in favour of a man with such ahead of hair as yours.
When shall you be able to enter upon yournew duties?'
"'Well, it is a little awkward, for I have a business already,'said I.
"'Oh, never mind about that, Mr.
Wilson!'
said Vincent Spaulding.
'I should be able to look after that for you.'
"'What would be the hours?'
I asked.
"'Ten to two.'
"Now a pawnbroker's business is mostly done of an evening, Mr.Holmes, especially Thursday and Friday evening, which is justbefore pay-day; so it would suit me very well to earn a little inthe mornings.
Besides, I knew that my assistant was a good man,and that he would see to anything that turned up.
"'That would suit me very well,' said I.
'And the pay?'
"'Is 4 pounds a week.'
"'And the work?'
"'Is purely nominal.'
"'What do you call purely nominal?'
"'Well, you have to be in the office, or at least in thebuilding, the whole time.
If you leave, you forfeit your wholeposition forever.
The will is very clear upon that point.
Youdon't comply with the conditions if you budge from the officeduring that time.'
"'It's only four hours a day, and I should not think of leaving,'said I.
"'No excuse will avail,' said Mr. Duncan Ross; 'neither sicknessnor business nor anything else.
There you must stay, or you loseyour billet.'
"'And the work?'
"'Is to copy out the "Encyclopaedia Britannica."
There is the firstvolume of it in that press.
You must find your own ink, pens, andblotting-paper, but we provide this table and chair.
Will you beready to-morrow?'
"'Certainly,' I answered.
"'Then, good-bye, Mr. Jabez Wilson, and let me congratulate youonce more on the important position which you have been fortunateenough to gain.'
He bowed me out of the room and I went home withmy assistant, hardly knowing what to say or do, I was so pleasedat my own good fortune.
"Well, I thought over the matter all day, and by evening I was inlow spirits again; for I had quite persuaded myself that thewhole affair must be some great hoax or fraud, though what itsobject might be I could not imagine.
It seemed altogether pastbelief that anyone could make such a will, or that they would paysuch a sum for doing anything so simple as copying out the'Encyclopaedia Britannica.'
Vincent Spaulding did what he could tocheer me up, but by bedtime I had reasoned myself out of thewhole thing.
However, in the morning I determined to have a lookat it anyhow, so I bought a penny bottle of ink, and with aquill-pen, and seven sheets of foolscap paper, I started off forPope's Court.
"Well, to my surprise and delight, everything was as right aspossible.
The table was set out ready for me, and Mr. Duncan Rosswas there to see that I got fairly to work.
He started me offupon the letter A, and then he left me; but he would drop in fromtime to time to see that all was right with me.
At two o'clock hebade me good-day, complimented me upon the amount that I hadwritten, and locked the door of the office after me.
"This went on day after day, Mr. Holmes, and on Saturday themanager came in and planked down four golden sovereigns for myweek's work.
It was the same next week, and the same the weekafter.
Every morning I was there at ten, and every afternoon Ileft at two.
By degrees Mr. Duncan Ross took to coming in onlyonce of a morning, and then, after a time, he did not come in atall.
Still, of course, I never dared to leave the room for aninstant, for I was not sure when he might come, and the billetwas such a good one, and suited me so well, that I would not riskthe loss of it.
"Eight weeks passed away like this, and I had written aboutAbbots and Archery and Armour and Architecture and Attica, andhoped with diligence that I might get on to the B's before verylong.
It cost me something in foolscap, and I had pretty nearlyfilled a shelf with my writings.
And then suddenly the wholebusiness came to an end."
"To an end?"
"Yes, sir.
And no later than this morning.
I went to my work asusual at ten o'clock, but the door was shut and locked, with alittle square of cardboard hammered on to the middle of thepanel with a tack.
Here it is, and you can read for yourself."
He held up a piece of white cardboard about the size of a sheetof note-paper.
It read in this fashion:                  THE RED-HEADED LEAGUE                           IS                        DISSOLVED.
October 9, 1890.
Sherlock Holmes and I surveyed this curt announcement and therueful face behind it, until the comical side of the affair socompletely overtopped every other consideration that we bothburst out into a roar of laughter.
"I cannot see that there is anything very funny," cried ourclient, flushing up to the roots of his flaming head.
"If you cando nothing better than laugh at me, I can go elsewhere."
"No, no," cried Holmes, shoving him back into the chair fromwhich he had half risen.
"I really wouldn't miss your case forthe world.
It is most refreshingly unusual.
But there is, if youwill excuse my saying so, something just a little funny about it.
Pray what steps did you take when you found the card upon thedoor?"
"I was staggered, sir.
I did not know what to do.
Then I calledat the offices round, but none of them seemed to know anythingabout it.
Finally, I went to the landlord, who is an accountantliving on the ground-floor, and I asked him if he could tell mewhat had become of the Red-headed League.
He said that he hadnever heard of any such body.
Then I asked him who Mr. DuncanRoss was.
He answered that the name was new to him.
"'Well,' said I, 'the gentleman at No.
4.'
"'What, the red-headed man?'
"'Yes.'
"'Oh,' said he, 'his name was William Morris.
He was a solicitorand was using my room as a temporary convenience until his newpremises were ready.
He moved out yesterday.'
"'Where could I find him?'
"'Oh, at his new offices.
He did tell me the address.
Yes, 17King Edward Street, near St.
Paul's.'
"I started off, Mr. Holmes, but when I got to that address it wasa manufactory of artificial knee-caps, and no one in it had everheard of either Mr. William Morris or Mr. Duncan Ross."
"And what did you do then?"
asked Holmes.
"I went home to Saxe-Coburg Square, and I took the advice of myassistant.
But he could not help me in any way.
He could only saythat if I waited I should hear by post.
But that was not quitegood enough, Mr. Holmes.
I did not wish to lose such a placewithout a struggle, so, as I had heard that you were good enoughto give advice to poor folk who were in need of it, I came rightaway to you."
"And you did very wisely," said Holmes.
"Your case is anexceedingly remarkable one, and I shall be happy to look into it.
From what you have told me I think that it is possible thatgraver issues hang from it than might at first sight appear."
"Grave enough!"
said Mr. Jabez Wilson.
"Why, I have lost fourpound a week."
"As far as you are personally concerned," remarked Holmes, "I donot see that you have any grievance against this extraordinaryleague.
On the contrary, you are, as I understand, richer by some30 pounds, to say nothing of the minute knowledge which you havegained on every subject which comes under the letter A.
You havelost nothing by them."
"No, sir.
But I want to find out about them, and who they are,and what their object was in playing this prank--if it was aprank--upon me.
It was a pretty expensive joke for them, for itcost them two and thirty pounds."
"We shall endeavour to clear up these points for you.
And, first,one or two questions, Mr. Wilson.
This assistant of yours whofirst called your attention to the advertisement--how long had hebeen with you?"
"About a month then."
"How did he come?"
"In answer to an advertisement."
"Was he the only applicant?"
"No, I had a dozen."
"Why did you pick him?"
"Because he was handy and would come cheap."
"At half-wages, in fact."
"Yes."
"What is he like, this Vincent Spaulding?"
"Small, stout-built, very quick in his ways, no hair on his face,though he's not short of thirty.
Has a white splash of acid uponhis forehead."
Holmes sat up in his chair in considerable excitement.
"I thoughtas much," said he.
"Have you ever observed that his ears arepierced for earrings?"
"Yes, sir.
He told me that a gipsy had done it for him when hewas a lad."
"Hum!"
said Holmes, sinking back in deep thought.
"He is stillwith you?"
"Oh, yes, sir; I have only just left him."
"And has your business been attended to in your absence?"
"Nothing to complain of, sir.
There's never very much to do of amorning."
"That will do, Mr. Wilson.
I shall be happy to give you anopinion upon the subject in the course of a day or two.
To-day isSaturday, and I hope that by Monday we may come to a conclusion."
"Well, Watson," said Holmes when our visitor had left us, "whatdo you make of it all?"
"I make nothing of it," I answered frankly.
"It is a mostmysterious business."
"As a rule," said Holmes, "the more bizarre a thing is the lessmysterious it proves to be.
It is your commonplace, featurelesscrimes which are really puzzling, just as a commonplace face isthe most difficult to identify.
But I must be prompt over thismatter."
"What are you going to do, then?"
I asked.
"To smoke," he answered.
"It is quite a three pipe problem, and Ibeg that you won't speak to me for fifty minutes."
He curledhimself up in his chair, with his thin knees drawn up to hishawk-like nose, and there he sat with his eyes closed and hisblack clay pipe thrusting out like the bill of some strange bird.
I had come to the conclusion that he had dropped asleep, andindeed was nodding myself, when he suddenly sprang out of hischair with the gesture of a man who has made up his mind and puthis pipe down upon the mantelpiece.
"Sarasate plays at the St. James's Hall this afternoon," heremarked.
"What do you think, Watson?
Could your patients spareyou for a few hours?"
"I have nothing to do to-day.
My practice is never veryabsorbing."
"Then put on your hat and come.
I am going through the Cityfirst, and we can have some lunch on the way.
I observe thatthere is a good deal of German music on the programme, which israther more to my taste than Italian or French.
It isintrospective, and I want to introspect.
Come along!"
We travelled by the Underground as far as Aldersgate; and a shortwalk took us to Saxe-Coburg Square, the scene of the singularstory which we had listened to in the morning.
It was a poky,little, shabby-genteel place, where four lines of dingytwo-storied brick houses looked out into a small railed-inenclosure, where a lawn of weedy grass and a few clumps of fadedlaurel-bushes made a hard fight against a smoke-laden anduncongenial atmosphere.
Three gilt balls and a brown board with"JABEZ WILSON" in white letters, upon a corner house, announcedthe place where our red-headed client carried on his business.
Sherlock Holmes stopped in front of it with his head on one sideand looked it all over, with his eyes shining brightly betweenpuckered lids.
Then he walked slowly up the street, and then downagain to the corner, still looking keenly at the houses.
Finallyhe returned to the pawnbroker's, and, having thumped vigorouslyupon the pavement with his stick two or three times, he went upto the door and knocked.
It was instantly opened by abright-looking, clean-shaven young fellow, who asked him to stepin.
"Thank you," said Holmes, "I only wished to ask you how you wouldgo from here to the Strand."
"Third right, fourth left," answered the assistant promptly,closing the door.
"Smart fellow, that," observed Holmes as we walked away.
"He is,in my judgment, the fourth smartest man in London, and for daringI am not sure that he has not a claim to be third.
I have knownsomething of him before."
"Evidently," said I, "Mr. Wilson's assistant counts for a gooddeal in this mystery of the Red-headed League.
I am sure that youinquired your way merely in order that you might see him."
"Not him."
"What then?"
"The knees of his trousers."
"And what did you see?"
"What I expected to see."
"Why did you beat the pavement?"
"My dear doctor, this is a time for observation, not for talk.
Weare spies in an enemy's country.
We know something of Saxe-CoburgSquare.
Let us now explore the parts which lie behind it."
The road in which we found ourselves as we turned round thecorner from the retired Saxe-Coburg Square presented as great acontrast to it as the front of a picture does to the back.
It wasone of the main arteries which conveyed the traffic of the Cityto the north and west.
The roadway was blocked with the immensestream of commerce flowing in a double tide inward and outward,while the footpaths were black with the hurrying swarm ofpedestrians.
It was difficult to realise as we looked at the lineof fine shops and stately business premises that they reallyabutted on the other side upon the faded and stagnant squarewhich we had just quitted.
"Let me see," said Holmes, standing at the corner and glancingalong the line, "I should like just to remember the order of thehouses here.
It is a hobby of mine to have an exact knowledge ofLondon.
There is Mortimer's, the tobacconist, the littlenewspaper shop, the Coburg branch of the City and Suburban Bank,the Vegetarian Restaurant, and McFarlane's carriage-buildingdepot.
That carries us right on to the other block.
And now,Doctor, we've done our work, so it's time we had some play.
Asandwich and a cup of coffee, and then off to violin-land, whereall is sweetness and delicacy and harmony, and there are nored-headed clients to vex us with their conundrums."
My friend was an enthusiastic musician, being himself not only avery capable performer but a composer of no ordinary merit.
Allthe afternoon he sat in the stalls wrapped in the most perfecthappiness, gently waving his long, thin fingers in time to themusic, while his gently smiling face and his languid, dreamy eyeswere as unlike those of Holmes the sleuth-hound, Holmes therelentless, keen-witted, ready-handed criminal agent, as it waspossible to conceive.
In his singular character the dual naturealternately asserted itself, and his extreme exactness andastuteness represented, as I have often thought, the reactionagainst the poetic and contemplative mood which occasionallypredominated in him.
The swing of his nature took him fromextreme languor to devouring energy; and, as I knew well, he wasnever so truly formidable as when, for days on end, he had beenlounging in his armchair amid his improvisations and hisblack-letter editions.
Then it was that the lust of the chasewould suddenly come upon him, and that his brilliant reasoningpower would rise to the level of intuition, until those who wereunacquainted with his methods would look askance at him as on aman whose knowledge was not that of other mortals.
When I saw himthat afternoon so enwrapped in the music at St. James's Hall Ifelt that an evil time might be coming upon those whom he had sethimself to hunt down.
"You want to go home, no doubt, Doctor," he remarked as weemerged.
"Yes, it would be as well."
"And I have some business to do which will take some hours.
Thisbusiness at Coburg Square is serious."
"Why serious?"
"A considerable crime is in contemplation.
I have every reason tobelieve that we shall be in time to stop it.
But to-day beingSaturday rather complicates matters.
I shall want your helpto-night."
"At what time?"
"Ten will be early enough."
"I shall be at Baker Street at ten."
"Very well.
And, I say, Doctor, there may be some little danger,so kindly put your army revolver in your pocket."
He waved hishand, turned on his heel, and disappeared in an instant among thecrowd.
I trust that I am not more dense than my neighbours, but I wasalways oppressed with a sense of my own stupidity in my dealingswith Sherlock Holmes.
Here I had heard what he had heard, I hadseen what he had seen, and yet from his words it was evident thathe saw clearly not only what had happened but what was about tohappen, while to me the whole business was still confused andgrotesque.
As I drove home to my house in Kensington I thoughtover it all, from the extraordinary story of the red-headedcopier of the "Encyclopaedia" down to the visit to Saxe-CoburgSquare, and the ominous words with which he had parted from me.
What was this nocturnal expedition, and why should I go armed?
Where were we going, and what were we to do?
I had the hint fromHolmes that this smooth-faced pawnbroker's assistant was aformidable man--a man who might play a deep game.
I tried topuzzle it out, but gave it up in despair and set the matter asideuntil night should bring an explanation.
It was a quarter-past nine when I started from home and made myway across the Park, and so through Oxford Street to BakerStreet.
Two hansoms were standing at the door, and as I enteredthe passage I heard the sound of voices from above.
On enteringhis room I found Holmes in animated conversation with two men,one of whom I recognised as Peter Jones, the official policeagent, while the other was a long, thin, sad-faced man, with avery shiny hat and oppressively respectable frock-coat.
"Ha!
Our party is complete," said Holmes, buttoning up hispea-jacket and taking his heavy hunting crop from the rack.
"Watson, I think you know Mr. Jones, of Scotland Yard?
Let meintroduce you to Mr. Merryweather, who is to be our companion into-night's adventure."
"We're hunting in couples again, Doctor, you see," said Jones inhis consequential way.
"Our friend here is a wonderful man forstarting a chase.
All he wants is an old dog to help him to dothe running down."
"I hope a wild goose may not prove to be the end of our chase,"observed Mr. Merryweather gloomily.
"You may place considerable confidence in Mr. Holmes, sir," saidthe police agent loftily.
"He has his own little methods, whichare, if he won't mind my saying so, just a little too theoreticaland fantastic, but he has the makings of a detective in him.
Itis not too much to say that once or twice, as in that business ofthe Sholto murder and the Agra treasure, he has been more nearlycorrect than the official force."
"Oh, if you say so, Mr. Jones, it is all right," said thestranger with deference.
"Still, I confess that I miss my rubber.
It is the first Saturday night for seven-and-twenty years that Ihave not had my rubber."
"I think you will find," said Sherlock Holmes, "that you willplay for a higher stake to-night than you have ever done yet, andthat the play will be more exciting.
For you, Mr. Merryweather,the stake will be some 30,000 pounds; and for you, Jones, it willbe the man upon whom you wish to lay your hands."
"John Clay, the murderer, thief, smasher, and forger.
He's ayoung man, Mr. Merryweather, but he is at the head of hisprofession, and I would rather have my bracelets on him than onany criminal in London.
He's a remarkable man, is young JohnClay.
His grandfather was a royal duke, and he himself has beento Eton and Oxford.
His brain is as cunning as his fingers, andthough we meet signs of him at every turn, we never know where tofind the man himself.
He'll crack a crib in Scotland one week,and be raising money to build an orphanage in Cornwall the next.
I've been on his track for years and have never set eyes on himyet."
"I hope that I may have the pleasure of introducing you to-night.
I've had one or two little turns also with Mr. John Clay, and Iagree with you that he is at the head of his profession.
It ispast ten, however, and quite time that we started.
If you twowill take the first hansom, Watson and I will follow in thesecond."
Sherlock Holmes was not very communicative during the long driveand lay back in the cab humming the tunes which he had heard inthe afternoon.
We rattled through an endless labyrinth of gas-litstreets until we emerged into Farrington Street.
"We are close there now," my friend remarked.
"This fellowMerryweather is a bank director, and personally interested in thematter.
I thought it as well to have Jones with us also.
He isnot a bad fellow, though an absolute imbecile in his profession.
He has one positive virtue.
He is as brave as a bulldog and astenacious as a lobster if he gets his claws upon anyone.
Here weare, and they are waiting for us."
We had reached the same crowded thoroughfare in which we hadfound ourselves in the morning.
Our cabs were dismissed, and,following the guidance of Mr. Merryweather, we passed down anarrow passage and through a side door, which he opened for us.
Within there was a small corridor, which ended in a very massiveiron gate.
This also was opened, and led down a flight of windingstone steps, which terminated at another formidable gate.
Mr.Merryweather stopped to light a lantern, and then conducted usdown a dark, earth-smelling passage, and so, after opening athird door, into a huge vault or cellar, which was piled allround with crates and massive boxes.
"You are not very vulnerable from above," Holmes remarked as heheld up the lantern and gazed about him.
"Nor from below," said Mr. Merryweather, striking his stick uponthe flags which lined the floor.
"Why, dear me, it sounds quitehollow!"
he remarked, looking up in surprise.
"I must really ask you to be a little more quiet!"
said Holmesseverely.
"You have already imperilled the whole success of ourexpedition.
Might I beg that you would have the goodness to sitdown upon one of those boxes, and not to interfere?"
The solemn Mr. Merryweather perched himself upon a crate, with avery injured expression upon his face, while Holmes fell upon hisknees upon the floor and, with the lantern and a magnifying lens,began to examine minutely the cracks between the stones.
A fewseconds sufficed to satisfy him, for he sprang to his feet againand put his glass in his pocket.
"We have at least an hour before us," he remarked, "for they canhardly take any steps until the good pawnbroker is safely in bed.
Then they will not lose a minute, for the sooner they do theirwork the longer time they will have for their escape.
We are atpresent, Doctor--as no doubt you have divined--in the cellar ofthe City branch of one of the principal London banks.
Mr.Merryweather is the chairman of directors, and he will explain toyou that there are reasons why the more daring criminals ofLondon should take a considerable interest in this cellar atpresent."
"It is our French gold," whispered the director.
"We have hadseveral warnings that an attempt might be made upon it."
"Your French gold?"
"Yes.
We had occasion some months ago to strengthen our resourcesand borrowed for that purpose 30,000 napoleons from the Bank ofFrance.
It has become known that we have never had occasion tounpack the money, and that it is still lying in our cellar.
Thecrate upon which I sit contains 2,000 napoleons packed betweenlayers of lead foil.
Our reserve of bullion is much larger atpresent than is usually kept in a single branch office, and thedirectors have had misgivings upon the subject."
"Which were very well justified," observed Holmes.
"And now it istime that we arranged our little plans.
I expect that within anhour matters will come to a head.
In the meantime Mr.Merryweather, we must put the screen over that dark lantern."
"And sit in the dark?"
"I am afraid so.
I had brought a pack of cards in my pocket, andI thought that, as we were a partie carrée, you might have yourrubber after all.
But I see that the enemy's preparations havegone so far that we cannot risk the presence of a light.
And,first of all, we must choose our positions.
These are daring men,and though we shall take them at a disadvantage, they may do ussome harm unless we are careful.
I shall stand behind this crate,and do you conceal yourselves behind those.
Then, when I flash alight upon them, close in swiftly.
If they fire, Watson, have nocompunction about shooting them down."
I placed my revolver, cocked, upon the top of the wooden casebehind which I crouched.
Holmes shot the slide across the frontof his lantern and left us in pitch darkness--such an absolutedarkness as I have never before experienced.
The smell of hotmetal remained to assure us that the light was still there, readyto flash out at a moment's notice.
To me, with my nerves workedup to a pitch of expectancy, there was something depressing andsubduing in the sudden gloom, and in the cold dank air of thevault.
"They have but one retreat," whispered Holmes.
"That is backthrough the house into Saxe-Coburg Square.
I hope that you havedone what I asked you, Jones?"
"I have an inspector and two officers waiting at the front door."
"Then we have stopped all the holes.
And now we must be silentand wait."
What a time it seemed!
From comparing notes afterwards it was butan hour and a quarter, yet it appeared to me that the night musthave almost gone and the dawn be breaking above us.
My limbswere weary and stiff, for I feared to change my position; yet mynerves were worked up to the highest pitch of tension, and myhearing was so acute that I could not only hear the gentlebreathing of my companions, but I could distinguish the deeper,heavier in-breath of the bulky Jones from the thin, sighing noteof the bank director.
From my position I could look over the casein the direction of the floor.
Suddenly my eyes caught the glintof a light.
At first it was but a lurid spark upon the stone pavement.
Thenit lengthened out until it became a yellow line, and then,without any warning or sound, a gash seemed to open and a handappeared, a white, almost womanly hand, which felt about in thecentre of the little area of light.
For a minute or more thehand, with its writhing fingers, protruded out of the floor.
Thenit was withdrawn as suddenly as it appeared, and all was darkagain save the single lurid spark which marked a chink betweenthe stones.
Its disappearance, however, was but momentary.
With a rending,tearing sound, one of the broad, white stones turned over uponits side and left a square, gaping hole, through which streamedthe light of a lantern.
Over the edge there peeped a clean-cut,boyish face, which looked keenly about it, and then, with a handon either side of the aperture, drew itself shoulder-high andwaist-high, until one knee rested upon the edge.
In anotherinstant he stood at the side of the hole and was hauling afterhim a companion, lithe and small like himself, with a pale faceand a shock of very red hair.
"It's all clear," he whispered.
"Have you the chisel and thebags?
Great Scott!
Jump, Archie, jump, and I'll swing for it!"
Sherlock Holmes had sprung out and seized the intruder by thecollar.
The other dived down the hole, and I heard the sound ofrending cloth as Jones clutched at his skirts.
The light flashedupon the barrel of a revolver, but Holmes' hunting crop camedown on the man's wrist, and the pistol clinked upon the stonefloor.
"It's no use, John Clay," said Holmes blandly.
"You have nochance at all."
"So I see," the other answered with the utmost coolness.
"I fancythat my pal is all right, though I see you have got hiscoat-tails."
"There are three men waiting for him at the door," said Holmes.
"Oh, indeed!
You seem to have done the thing very completely.
Imust compliment you."
"And I you," Holmes answered.
"Your red-headed idea was very newand effective."
"You'll see your pal again presently," said Jones.
"He's quickerat climbing down holes than I am.
Just hold out while I fix thederbies."
"I beg that you will not touch me with your filthy hands,"remarked our prisoner as the handcuffs clattered upon his wrists.
"You may not be aware that I have royal blood in my veins.
Havethe goodness, also, when you address me always to say 'sir' and'please.'"
"All right," said Jones with a stare and a snigger.
"Well, wouldyou please, sir, march upstairs, where we can get a cab to carryyour Highness to the police-station?"
"That is better," said John Clay serenely.
He made a sweeping bowto the three of us and walked quietly off in the custody of thedetective.
"Really, Mr. Holmes," said Mr. Merryweather as we followed themfrom the cellar, "I do not know how the bank can thank you orrepay you.
There is no doubt that you have detected and defeatedin the most complete manner one of the most determined attemptsat bank robbery that have ever come within my experience."
"I have had one or two little scores of my own to settle with Mr.John Clay," said Holmes.
"I have been at some small expense overthis matter, which I shall expect the bank to refund, but beyondthat I am amply repaid by having had an experience which is inmany ways unique, and by hearing the very remarkable narrative ofthe Red-headed League."
"You see, Watson," he explained in the early hours of the morningas we sat over a glass of whisky and soda in Baker Street, "itwas perfectly obvious from the first that the only possibleobject of this rather fantastic business of the advertisement ofthe League, and the copying of the 'Encyclopaedia,' must be to getthis not over-bright pawnbroker out of the way for a number ofhours every day.
It was a curious way of managing it, but,really, it would be difficult to suggest a better.
The method wasno doubt suggested to Clay's ingenious mind by the colour of hisaccomplice's hair.
The 4 pounds a week was a lure which must drawhim, and what was it to them, who were playing for thousands?
They put in the advertisement, one rogue has the temporaryoffice, the other rogue incites the man to apply for it, andtogether they manage to secure his absence every morning in theweek.
From the time that I heard of the assistant having come forhalf wages, it was obvious to me that he had some strong motivefor securing the situation."
"But how could you guess what the motive was?"
"Had there been women in the house, I should have suspected amere vulgar intrigue.
That, however, was out of the question.
Theman's business was a small one, and there was nothing in hishouse which could account for such elaborate preparations, andsuch an expenditure as they were at.
It must, then, be somethingout of the house.
What could it be?
I thought of the assistant'sfondness for photography, and his trick of vanishing into thecellar.
The cellar!
There was the end of this tangled clue.
ThenI made inquiries as to this mysterious assistant and found that Ihad to deal with one of the coolest and most daring criminals inLondon.
He was doing something in the cellar--something whichtook many hours a day for months on end.
What could it be, oncemore?
I could think of nothing save that he was running a tunnelto some other building.
"So far I had got when we went to visit the scene of action.
Isurprised you by beating upon the pavement with my stick.
I wasascertaining whether the cellar stretched out in front or behind.
It was not in front.
Then I rang the bell, and, as I hoped, theassistant answered it.
We have had some skirmishes, but we hadnever set eyes upon each other before.
I hardly looked at hisface.
His knees were what I wished to see.
You must yourself haveremarked how worn, wrinkled, and stained they were.
They spoke ofthose hours of burrowing.
The only remaining point was what theywere burrowing for.
I walked round the corner, saw the City andSuburban Bank abutted on our friend's premises, and felt that Ihad solved my problem.
When you drove home after the concert Icalled upon Scotland Yard and upon the chairman of the bankdirectors, with the result that you have seen."
"And how could you tell that they would make their attemptto-night?"
I asked.
"Well, when they closed their League offices that was a sign thatthey cared no longer about Mr. Jabez Wilson's presence--in otherwords, that they had completed their tunnel.
But it was essentialthat they should use it soon, as it might be discovered, or thebullion might be removed.
Saturday would suit them better thanany other day, as it would give them two days for their escape.
For all these reasons I expected them to come to-night."
"You reasoned it out beautifully," I exclaimed in unfeignedadmiration.
"It is so long a chain, and yet every link ringstrue."
"It saved me from ennui," he answered, yawning.
"Alas!
I alreadyfeel it closing in upon me.
My life is spent in one long effortto escape from the commonplaces of existence.
These littleproblems help me to do so."
"And you are a benefactor of the race," said I.
He shrugged his shoulders.
"Well, perhaps, after all, it is ofsome little use," he remarked.
"'L'homme c'est rien--l'oeuvrec'est tout,' as Gustave Flaubert wrote to George Sand."
ADVENTURE III.
A CASE OF IDENTITY"My dear fellow," said Sherlock Holmes as we sat on either sideof the fire in his lodgings at Baker Street, "life is infinitelystranger than anything which the mind of man could invent.
Wewould not dare to conceive the things which are really merecommonplaces of existence.
If we could fly out of that windowhand in hand, hover over this great city, gently remove theroofs, and peep in at the queer things which are going on, thestrange coincidences, the plannings, the cross-purposes, thewonderful chains of events, working through generations, andleading to the most outré results, it would make all fiction withits conventionalities and foreseen conclusions most stale andunprofitable."
"And yet I am not convinced of it," I answered.
"The cases whichcome to light in the papers are, as a rule, bald enough, andvulgar enough.
We have in our police reports realism pushed toits extreme limits, and yet the result is, it must be confessed,neither fascinating nor artistic."
"A certain selection and discretion must be used in producing arealistic effect," remarked Holmes.
"This is wanting in thepolice report, where more stress is laid, perhaps, upon theplatitudes of the magistrate than upon the details, which to anobserver contain the vital essence of the whole matter.
Dependupon it, there is nothing so unnatural as the commonplace."
I smiled and shook my head.
"I can quite understand your thinkingso," I said.
"Of course, in your position of unofficial adviserand helper to everybody who is absolutely puzzled, throughoutthree continents, you are brought in contact with all that isstrange and bizarre.
But here"--I picked up the morning paperfrom the ground--"let us put it to a practical test.
Here is thefirst heading upon which I come.
'A husband's cruelty to hiswife.'
There is half a column of print, but I know withoutreading it that it is all perfectly familiar to me.
There is, ofcourse, the other woman, the drink, the push, the blow, thebruise, the sympathetic sister or landlady.
The crudest ofwriters could invent nothing more crude."
"Indeed, your example is an unfortunate one for your argument,"said Holmes, taking the paper and glancing his eye down it.
"Thisis the Dundas separation case, and, as it happens, I was engagedin clearing up some small points in connection with it.
Thehusband was a teetotaler, there was no other woman, and theconduct complained of was that he had drifted into the habit ofwinding up every meal by taking out his false teeth and hurlingthem at his wife, which, you will allow, is not an action likelyto occur to the imagination of the average story-teller.
Take apinch of snuff, Doctor, and acknowledge that I have scored overyou in your example."
He held out his snuffbox of old gold, with a great amethyst inthe centre of the lid.
Its splendour was in such contrast to hishomely ways and simple life that I could not help commenting uponit.
"Ah," said he, "I forgot that I had not seen you for some weeks.
It is a little souvenir from the King of Bohemia in return for myassistance in the case of the Irene Adler papers."
"And the ring?"
I asked, glancing at a remarkable brilliant whichsparkled upon his finger.
"It was from the reigning family of Holland, though the matter inwhich I served them was of such delicacy that I cannot confide iteven to you, who have been good enough to chronicle one or two ofmy little problems."
"And have you any on hand just now?"
I asked with interest.
"Some ten or twelve, but none which present any feature ofinterest.
They are important, you understand, without beinginteresting.
Indeed, I have found that it is usually inunimportant matters that there is a field for the observation,and for the quick analysis of cause and effect which gives thecharm to an investigation.
The larger crimes are apt to be thesimpler, for the bigger the crime the more obvious, as a rule, isthe motive.
In these cases, save for one rather intricate matterwhich has been referred to me from Marseilles, there is nothingwhich presents any features of interest.
It is possible, however,that I may have something better before very many minutes areover, for this is one of my clients, or I am much mistaken."
He had risen from his chair and was standing between the partedblinds gazing down into the dull neutral-tinted London street.
Looking over his shoulder, I saw that on the pavement oppositethere stood a large woman with a heavy fur boa round her neck,and a large curling red feather in a broad-brimmed hat which wastilted in a coquettish Duchess of Devonshire fashion over herear.
From under this great panoply she peeped up in a nervous,hesitating fashion at our windows, while her body oscillatedbackward and forward, and her fingers fidgeted with her glovebuttons.
Suddenly, with a plunge, as of the swimmer who leavesthe bank, she hurried across the road, and we heard the sharpclang of the bell.
"I have seen those symptoms before," said Holmes, throwing hiscigarette into the fire.
"Oscillation upon the pavement alwaysmeans an affaire de coeur.
She would like advice, but is not surethat the matter is not too delicate for communication.
And yeteven here we may discriminate.
When a woman has been seriouslywronged by a man she no longer oscillates, and the usual symptomis a broken bell wire.
Here we may take it that there is a lovematter, but that the maiden is not so much angry as perplexed, orgrieved.
But here she comes in person to resolve our doubts."
As he spoke there was a tap at the door, and the boy in buttonsentered to announce Miss Mary Sutherland, while the lady herselfloomed behind his small black figure like a full-sailedmerchant-man behind a tiny pilot boat.
Sherlock Holmes welcomedher with the easy courtesy for which he was remarkable, and,having closed the door and bowed her into an armchair, he lookedher over in the minute and yet abstracted fashion which waspeculiar to him.
"Do you not find," he said, "that with your short sight it is alittle trying to do so much typewriting?"
"I did at first," she answered, "but now I know where the lettersare without looking."
Then, suddenly realising the full purportof his words, she gave a violent start and looked up, with fearand astonishment upon her broad, good-humoured face.
"You'veheard about me, Mr. Holmes," she cried, "else how could you knowall that?"
"Never mind," said Holmes, laughing; "it is my business to knowthings.
Perhaps I have trained myself to see what othersoverlook.
If not, why should you come to consult me?"
"I came to you, sir, because I heard of you from Mrs. Etherege,whose husband you found so easy when the police and everyone hadgiven him up for dead.
Oh, Mr. Holmes, I wish you would do asmuch for me.
I'm not rich, but still I have a hundred a year inmy own right, besides the little that I make by the machine, andI would give it all to know what has become of Mr. Hosmer Angel."
"Why did you come away to consult me in such a hurry?"
askedSherlock Holmes, with his finger-tips together and his eyes tothe ceiling.
Again a startled look came over the somewhat vacuous face of MissMary Sutherland.
"Yes, I did bang out of the house," she said,"for it made me angry to see the easy way in which Mr.Windibank--that is, my father--took it all.
He would not go tothe police, and he would not go to you, and so at last, as hewould do nothing and kept on saying that there was no harm done,it made me mad, and I just on with my things and came right awayto you."
"Your father," said Holmes, "your stepfather, surely, since thename is different."
"Yes, my stepfather.
I call him father, though it sounds funny,too, for he is only five years and two months older than myself."
"And your mother is alive?"
"Oh, yes, mother is alive and well.
I wasn't best pleased, Mr.Holmes, when she married again so soon after father's death, anda man who was nearly fifteen years younger than herself.
Fatherwas a plumber in the Tottenham Court Road, and he left a tidybusiness behind him, which mother carried on with Mr. Hardy, theforeman; but when Mr. Windibank came he made her sell thebusiness, for he was very superior, being a traveller in wines.
They got 4700 pounds for the goodwill and interest, which wasn'tnear as much as father could have got if he had been alive."
I had expected to see Sherlock Holmes impatient under thisrambling and inconsequential narrative, but, on the contrary, hehad listened with the greatest concentration of attention.
"Your own little income," he asked, "does it come out of thebusiness?"
"Oh, no, sir.
It is quite separate and was left me by my uncleNed in Auckland.
It is in New Zealand stock, paying 4 1/2 percent.
Two thousand five hundred pounds was the amount, but I canonly touch the interest."
"You interest me extremely," said Holmes.
"And since you draw solarge a sum as a hundred a year, with what you earn into thebargain, you no doubt travel a little and indulge yourself inevery way.
I believe that a single lady can get on very nicelyupon an income of about 60 pounds."
"I could do with much less than that, Mr. Holmes, but youunderstand that as long as I live at home I don't wish to be aburden to them, and so they have the use of the money just whileI am staying with them.
Of course, that is only just for thetime.
Mr. Windibank draws my interest every quarter and pays itover to mother, and I find that I can do pretty well with what Iearn at typewriting.
It brings me twopence a sheet, and I canoften do from fifteen to twenty sheets in a day."
"You have made your position very clear to me," said Holmes.
"This is my friend, Dr. Watson, before whom you can speak asfreely as before myself.
Kindly tell us now all about yourconnection with Mr. Hosmer Angel."
A flush stole over Miss Sutherland's face, and she pickednervously at the fringe of her jacket.
"I met him first at thegasfitters' ball," she said.
"They used to send father ticketswhen he was alive, and then afterwards they remembered us, andsent them to mother.
Mr. Windibank did not wish us to go.
Henever did wish us to go anywhere.
He would get quite mad if Iwanted so much as to join a Sunday-school treat.
But this time Iwas set on going, and I would go; for what right had he toprevent?
He said the folk were not fit for us to know, when allfather's friends were to be there.
And he said that I had nothingfit to wear, when I had my purple plush that I had never so muchas taken out of the drawer.
At last, when nothing else would do,he went off to France upon the business of the firm, but we went,mother and I, with Mr. Hardy, who used to be our foreman, and itwas there I met Mr. Hosmer Angel."
"I suppose," said Holmes, "that when Mr. Windibank came back fromFrance he was very annoyed at your having gone to the ball."
"Oh, well, he was very good about it.
He laughed, I remember, andshrugged his shoulders, and said there was no use denyinganything to a woman, for she would have her way."
"I see.
Then at the gasfitters' ball you met, as I understand, agentleman called Mr. Hosmer Angel."
"Yes, sir.
I met him that night, and he called next day to ask ifwe had got home all safe, and after that we met him--that is tosay, Mr. Holmes, I met him twice for walks, but after that fathercame back again, and Mr. Hosmer Angel could not come to the houseany more."
"No?"
"Well, you know father didn't like anything of the sort.
Hewouldn't have any visitors if he could help it, and he used tosay that a woman should be happy in her own family circle.
Butthen, as I used to say to mother, a woman wants her own circle tobegin with, and I had not got mine yet."
"But how about Mr. Hosmer Angel?
Did he make no attempt to seeyou?"
"Well, father was going off to France again in a week, and Hosmerwrote and said that it would be safer and better not to see eachother until he had gone.
We could write in the meantime, and heused to write every day.
I took the letters in in the morning, sothere was no need for father to know."
"Were you engaged to the gentleman at this time?"
"Oh, yes, Mr. Holmes.
We were engaged after the first walk thatwe took.
Hosmer--Mr. Angel--was a cashier in an office inLeadenhall Street--and--""What office?"
"That's the worst of it, Mr. Holmes, I don't know."
"Where did he live, then?"
"He slept on the premises."
"And you don't know his address?"
"No--except that it was Leadenhall Street."
"Where did you address your letters, then?"
"To the Leadenhall Street Post Office, to be left till calledfor.
He said that if they were sent to the office he would bechaffed by all the other clerks about having letters from a lady,so I offered to typewrite them, like he did his, but he wouldn'thave that, for he said that when I wrote them they seemed to comefrom me, but when they were typewritten he always felt that themachine had come between us.
That will just show you how fond hewas of me, Mr. Holmes, and the little things that he would thinkof."
"It was most suggestive," said Holmes.
"It has long been an axiomof mine that the little things are infinitely the most important.
Can you remember any other little things about Mr. Hosmer Angel?"
"He was a very shy man, Mr. Holmes.
He would rather walk with mein the evening than in the daylight, for he said that he hated tobe conspicuous.
Very retiring and gentlemanly he was.
Even hisvoice was gentle.
He'd had the quinsy and swollen glands when hewas young, he told me, and it had left him with a weak throat,and a hesitating, whispering fashion of speech.
He was alwayswell dressed, very neat and plain, but his eyes were weak, justas mine are, and he wore tinted glasses against the glare."
"Well, and what happened when Mr. Windibank, your stepfather,returned to France?"
"Mr. Hosmer Angel came to the house again and proposed that weshould marry before father came back.
He was in dreadful earnestand made me swear, with my hands on the Testament, that whateverhappened I would always be true to him.
Mother said he was quiteright to make me swear, and that it was a sign of his passion.
Mother was all in his favour from the first and was even fonderof him than I was.
Then, when they talked of marrying within theweek, I began to ask about father; but they both said never tomind about father, but just to tell him afterwards, and mothersaid she would make it all right with him.
I didn't quite likethat, Mr. Holmes.
It seemed funny that I should ask his leave, ashe was only a few years older than me; but I didn't want to doanything on the sly, so I wrote to father at Bordeaux, where thecompany has its French offices, but the letter came back to me onthe very morning of the wedding."
"It missed him, then?"
"Yes, sir; for he had started to England just before it arrived."
"Ha!
that was unfortunate.
Your wedding was arranged, then, forthe Friday.
Was it to be in church?"
"Yes, sir, but very quietly.
It was to be at St. Saviour's, nearKing's Cross, and we were to have breakfast afterwards at the St.Pancras Hotel.
Hosmer came for us in a hansom, but as there weretwo of us he put us both into it and stepped himself into afour-wheeler, which happened to be the only other cab in thestreet.
We got to the church first, and when the four-wheelerdrove up we waited for him to step out, but he never did, andwhen the cabman got down from the box and looked there was no onethere!
The cabman said that he could not imagine what had becomeof him, for he had seen him get in with his own eyes.
That waslast Friday, Mr. Holmes, and I have never seen or heard anythingsince then to throw any light upon what became of him."
"It seems to me that you have been very shamefully treated," saidHolmes.
"Oh, no, sir!
He was too good and kind to leave me so.
Why, allthe morning he was saying to me that, whatever happened, I was tobe true; and that even if something quite unforeseen occurred toseparate us, I was always to remember that I was pledged to him,and that he would claim his pledge sooner or later.
It seemedstrange talk for a wedding-morning, but what has happened sincegives a meaning to it."
"Most certainly it does.
Your own opinion is, then, that someunforeseen catastrophe has occurred to him?"
"Yes, sir.
I believe that he foresaw some danger, or else hewould not have talked so.
And then I think that what he foresawhappened."
"But you have no notion as to what it could have been?"
"None."
"One more question.
How did your mother take the matter?"
"She was angry, and said that I was never to speak of the matteragain."
"And your father?
Did you tell him?"
"Yes; and he seemed to think, with me, that something hadhappened, and that I should hear of Hosmer again.
As he said,what interest could anyone have in bringing me to the doors ofthe church, and then leaving me?
Now, if he had borrowed mymoney, or if he had married me and got my money settled on him,there might be some reason, but Hosmer was very independent aboutmoney and never would look at a shilling of mine.
And yet, whatcould have happened?
And why could he not write?
Oh, it drives mehalf-mad to think of it, and I can't sleep a wink at night."
Shepulled a little handkerchief out of her muff and began to sobheavily into it.
"I shall glance into the case for you," said Holmes, rising, "andI have no doubt that we shall reach some definite result.
Let theweight of the matter rest upon me now, and do not let your minddwell upon it further.
Above all, try to let Mr. Hosmer Angelvanish from your memory, as he has done from your life."
"Then you don't think I'll see him again?"
"I fear not."
"Then what has happened to him?"
"You will leave that question in my hands.
I should like anaccurate description of him and any letters of his which you canspare."
"I advertised for him in last Saturday's Chronicle," said she.
"Here is the slip and here are four letters from him."
"Thank you.
And your address?"
"No.
31 Lyon Place, Camberwell."
"Mr. Angel's address you never had, I understand.
Where is yourfather's place of business?"
"He travels for Westhouse & Marbank, the great claret importersof Fenchurch Street."
"Thank you.
You have made your statement very clearly.
You willleave the papers here, and remember the advice which I have givenyou.
Let the whole incident be a sealed book, and do not allow itto affect your life."
"You are very kind, Mr. Holmes, but I cannot do that.
I shall betrue to Hosmer.
He shall find me ready when he comes back."
For all the preposterous hat and the vacuous face, there wassomething noble in the simple faith of our visitor whichcompelled our respect.
She laid her little bundle of papers uponthe table and went her way, with a promise to come again whenevershe might be summoned.
Sherlock Holmes sat silent for a few minutes with his fingertipsstill pressed together, his legs stretched out in front of him,and his gaze directed upward to the ceiling.
Then he took downfrom the rack the old and oily clay pipe, which was to him as acounsellor, and, having lit it, he leaned back in his chair, withthe thick blue cloud-wreaths spinning up from him, and a look ofinfinite languor in his face.
"Quite an interesting study, that maiden," he observed.
"I foundher more interesting than her little problem, which, by the way,is rather a trite one.
You will find parallel cases, if youconsult my index, in Andover in '77, and there was something ofthe sort at The Hague last year.
Old as is the idea, however,there were one or two details which were new to me.
But themaiden herself was most instructive."
"You appeared to read a good deal upon her which was quiteinvisible to me," I remarked.
"Not invisible but unnoticed, Watson.
You did not know where tolook, and so you missed all that was important.
I can never bringyou to realise the importance of sleeves, the suggestiveness ofthumb-nails, or the great issues that may hang from a boot-lace.
Now, what did you gather from that woman's appearance?
Describeit."
"Well, she had a slate-coloured, broad-brimmed straw hat, with afeather of a brickish red.
Her jacket was black, with black beadssewn upon it, and a fringe of little black jet ornaments.
Herdress was brown, rather darker than coffee colour, with a littlepurple plush at the neck and sleeves.
Her gloves were greyish andwere worn through at the right forefinger.
Her boots I didn'tobserve.
She had small round, hanging gold earrings, and ageneral air of being fairly well-to-do in a vulgar, comfortable,easy-going way."
Sherlock Holmes clapped his hands softly together and chuckled.
"'Pon my word, Watson, you are coming along wonderfully.
You havereally done very well indeed.
It is true that you have missedeverything of importance, but you have hit upon the method, andyou have a quick eye for colour.
Never trust to generalimpressions, my boy, but concentrate yourself upon details.
Myfirst glance is always at a woman's sleeve.
In a man it isperhaps better first to take the knee of the trouser.
As youobserve, this woman had plush upon her sleeves, which is a mostuseful material for showing traces.
The double line a littleabove the wrist, where the typewritist presses against the table,was beautifully defined.
The sewing-machine, of the hand type,leaves a similar mark, but only on the left arm, and on the sideof it farthest from the thumb, instead of being right across thebroadest part, as this was.
I then glanced at her face, and,observing the dint of a pince-nez at either side of her nose, Iventured a remark upon short sight and typewriting, which seemedto surprise her."
"It surprised me."
"But, surely, it was obvious.
I was then much surprised andinterested on glancing down to observe that, though the bootswhich she was wearing were not unlike each other, they werereally odd ones; the one having a slightly decorated toe-cap, andthe other a plain one.
One was buttoned only in the two lowerbuttons out of five, and the other at the first, third, andfifth.
Now, when you see that a young lady, otherwise neatlydressed, has come away from home with odd boots, half-buttoned,it is no great deduction to say that she came away in a hurry."
"And what else?"
I asked, keenly interested, as I always was, bymy friend's incisive reasoning.
"I noted, in passing, that she had written a note before leavinghome but after being fully dressed.
You observed that her rightglove was torn at the forefinger, but you did not apparently seethat both glove and finger were stained with violet ink.
She hadwritten in a hurry and dipped her pen too deep.
It must have beenthis morning, or the mark would not remain clear upon the finger.
All this is amusing, though rather elementary, but I must go backto business, Watson.
Would you mind reading me the advertiseddescription of Mr. Hosmer Angel?"
I held the little printed slip to the light.
"Missing," it said, "on the morning of the fourteenth, a gentlemannamed Hosmer Angel.
About five ft. seven in.
in height;strongly built, sallow complexion, black hair, a little bald inthe centre, bushy, black side-whiskers and moustache; tintedglasses, slight infirmity of speech.
Was dressed, when last seen,in black frock-coat faced with silk, black waistcoat, gold Albertchain, and grey Harris tweed trousers, with brown gaiters overelastic-sided boots.
Known to have been employed in an office inLeadenhall Street.
Anybody bringing--""That will do," said Holmes.
"As to the letters," he continued,glancing over them, "they are very commonplace.
Absolutely noclue in them to Mr. Angel, save that he quotes Balzac once.
Thereis one remarkable point, however, which will no doubt strikeyou."
"They are typewritten," I remarked.
"Not only that, but the signature is typewritten.
Look at theneat little 'Hosmer Angel' at the bottom.
There is a date, yousee, but no superscription except Leadenhall Street, which israther vague.
The point about the signature is very suggestive--infact, we may call it conclusive."
"Of what?"
"My dear fellow, is it possible you do not see how strongly itbears upon the case?"
"I cannot say that I do unless it were that he wished to be ableto deny his signature if an action for breach of promise wereinstituted."
"No, that was not the point.
However, I shall write two letters,which should settle the matter.
One is to a firm in the City, theother is to the young lady's stepfather, Mr. Windibank, askinghim whether he could meet us here at six o'clock tomorrowevening.
It is just as well that we should do business with themale relatives.
And now, Doctor, we can do nothing until theanswers to those letters come, so we may put our little problemupon the shelf for the interim."
I had had so many reasons to believe in my friend's subtle powersof reasoning and extraordinary energy in action that I felt thathe must have some solid grounds for the assured and easydemeanour with which he treated the singular mystery which he hadbeen called upon to fathom.
Once only had I known him to fail, inthe case of the King of Bohemia and of the Irene Adlerphotograph; but when I looked back to the weird business of theSign of Four, and the extraordinary circumstances connected withthe Study in Scarlet, I felt that it would be a strange tangleindeed which he could not unravel.
I left him then, still puffing at his black clay pipe, with theconviction that when I came again on the next evening I wouldfind that he held in his hands all the clues which would lead upto the identity of the disappearing bridegroom of Miss MarySutherland.
A professional case of great gravity was engaging my ownattention at the time, and the whole of next day I was busy atthe bedside of the sufferer.
It was not until close upon sixo'clock that I found myself free and was able to spring into ahansom and drive to Baker Street, half afraid that I might be toolate to assist at the dénouement of the little mystery.
I foundSherlock Holmes alone, however, half asleep, with his long, thinform curled up in the recesses of his armchair.
A formidablearray of bottles and test-tubes, with the pungent cleanly smellof hydrochloric acid, told me that he had spent his day in thechemical work which was so dear to him.
"Well, have you solved it?"
I asked as I entered.
"Yes.
It was the bisulphate of baryta."
"No, no, the mystery!"
I cried.
"Oh, that!
I thought of the salt that I have been working upon.
There was never any mystery in the matter, though, as I saidyesterday, some of the details are of interest.
The only drawbackis that there is no law, I fear, that can touch the scoundrel."
"Who was he, then, and what was his object in deserting MissSutherland?"
The question was hardly out of my mouth, and Holmes had not yetopened his lips to reply, when we heard a heavy footfall in thepassage and a tap at the door.
"This is the girl's stepfather, Mr. James Windibank," saidHolmes.
"He has written to me to say that he would be here atsix.
Come in!"
The man who entered was a sturdy, middle-sized fellow, somethirty years of age, clean-shaven, and sallow-skinned, with abland, insinuating manner, and a pair of wonderfully sharp andpenetrating grey eyes.
He shot a questioning glance at each ofus, placed his shiny top-hat upon the sideboard, and with aslight bow sidled down into the nearest chair.
"Good-evening, Mr. James Windibank," said Holmes.
"I think thatthis typewritten letter is from you, in which you made anappointment with me for six o'clock?"
"Yes, sir.
I am afraid that I am a little late, but I am notquite my own master, you know.
I am sorry that Miss Sutherlandhas troubled you about this little matter, for I think it is farbetter not to wash linen of the sort in public.
It was quiteagainst my wishes that she came, but she is a very excitable,impulsive girl, as you may have noticed, and she is not easilycontrolled when she has made up her mind on a point.
Of course, Idid not mind you so much, as you are not connected with theofficial police, but it is not pleasant to have a familymisfortune like this noised abroad.
Besides, it is a uselessexpense, for how could you possibly find this Hosmer Angel?"
"On the contrary," said Holmes quietly; "I have every reason tobelieve that I will succeed in discovering Mr. Hosmer Angel."
Mr. Windibank gave a violent start and dropped his gloves.
"I amdelighted to hear it," he said.
"It is a curious thing," remarked Holmes, "that a typewriter hasreally quite as much individuality as a man's handwriting.
Unlessthey are quite new, no two of them write exactly alike.
Someletters get more worn than others, and some wear only on oneside.
Now, you remark in this note of yours, Mr. Windibank, thatin every case there is some little slurring over of the 'e,' anda slight defect in the tail of the 'r.'
There are fourteen othercharacteristics, but those are the more obvious."
"We do all our correspondence with this machine at the office,and no doubt it is a little worn," our visitor answered, glancingkeenly at Holmes with his bright little eyes.
"And now I will show you what is really a very interesting study,Mr. Windibank," Holmes continued.
"I think of writing anotherlittle monograph some of these days on the typewriter and itsrelation to crime.
It is a subject to which I have devoted somelittle attention.
I have here four letters which purport to comefrom the missing man.
They are all typewritten.
In each case, notonly are the 'e's' slurred and the 'r's' tailless, but you willobserve, if you care to use my magnifying lens, that the fourteenother characteristics to which I have alluded are there as well."
Mr. Windibank sprang out of his chair and picked up his hat.
"Icannot waste time over this sort of fantastic talk, Mr. Holmes,"he said.
"If you can catch the man, catch him, and let me knowwhen you have done it."
"Certainly," said Holmes, stepping over and turning the key inthe door.
"I let you know, then, that I have caught him!"
"What!
where?"
shouted Mr. Windibank, turning white to his lipsand glancing about him like a rat in a trap.
"Oh, it won't do--really it won't," said Holmes suavely.
"Thereis no possible getting out of it, Mr. Windibank.
It is quite tootransparent, and it was a very bad compliment when you said thatit was impossible for me to solve so simple a question.
That'sright!
Sit down and let us talk it over."
Our visitor collapsed into a chair, with a ghastly face and aglitter of moisture on his brow.
"It--it's not actionable," hestammered.
"I am very much afraid that it is not.
But between ourselves,Windibank, it was as cruel and selfish and heartless a trick in apetty way as ever came before me.
Now, let me just run over thecourse of events, and you will contradict me if I go wrong."
The man sat huddled up in his chair, with his head sunk upon hisbreast, like one who is utterly crushed.
Holmes stuck his feet upon the corner of the mantelpiece and, leaning back with his handsin his pockets, began talking, rather to himself, as it seemed,than to us.
"The man married a woman very much older than himself for hermoney," said he, "and he enjoyed the use of the money of thedaughter as long as she lived with them.
It was a considerablesum, for people in their position, and the loss of it would havemade a serious difference.
It was worth an effort to preserve it.
The daughter was of a good, amiable disposition, but affectionateand warm-hearted in her ways, so that it was evident that withher fair personal advantages, and her little income, she wouldnot be allowed to remain single long.
Now her marriage wouldmean, of course, the loss of a hundred a year, so what does herstepfather do to prevent it?
He takes the obvious course ofkeeping her at home and forbidding her to seek the company ofpeople of her own age.
But soon he found that that would notanswer forever.
She became restive, insisted upon her rights, andfinally announced her positive intention of going to a certainball.
What does her clever stepfather do then?
He conceives anidea more creditable to his head than to his heart.
With theconnivance and assistance of his wife he disguised himself,covered those keen eyes with tinted glasses, masked the face witha moustache and a pair of bushy whiskers, sunk that clear voiceinto an insinuating whisper, and doubly secure on account of thegirl's short sight, he appears as Mr. Hosmer Angel, and keeps offother lovers by making love himself."
"It was only a joke at first," groaned our visitor.
"We neverthought that she would have been so carried away."
"Very likely not.
However that may be, the young lady was verydecidedly carried away, and, having quite made up her mind thather stepfather was in France, the suspicion of treachery neverfor an instant entered her mind.
She was flattered by thegentleman's attentions, and the effect was increased by theloudly expressed admiration of her mother.
Then Mr. Angel beganto call, for it was obvious that the matter should be pushed asfar as it would go if a real effect were to be produced.
Therewere meetings, and an engagement, which would finally secure thegirl's affections from turning towards anyone else.
But thedeception could not be kept up forever.
These pretended journeysto France were rather cumbrous.
The thing to do was clearly tobring the business to an end in such a dramatic manner that itwould leave a permanent impression upon the young lady's mind andprevent her from looking upon any other suitor for some time tocome.
Hence those vows of fidelity exacted upon a Testament, andhence also the allusions to a possibility of something happeningon the very morning of the wedding.
James Windibank wished MissSutherland to be so bound to Hosmer Angel, and so uncertain as tohis fate, that for ten years to come, at any rate, she would notlisten to another man.
As far as the church door he brought her,and then, as he could go no farther, he conveniently vanishedaway by the old trick of stepping in at one door of afour-wheeler and out at the other.
I think that was the chain ofevents, Mr.
Windibank!"
Our visitor had recovered something of his assurance while Holmeshad been talking, and he rose from his chair now with a coldsneer upon his pale face.
"It may be so, or it may not, Mr. Holmes," said he, "but if youare so very sharp you ought to be sharp enough to know that it isyou who are breaking the law now, and not me.
I have done nothingactionable from the first, but as long as you keep that doorlocked you lay yourself open to an action for assault and illegalconstraint."
"The law cannot, as you say, touch you," said Holmes, unlockingand throwing open the door, "yet there never was a man whodeserved punishment more.
If the young lady has a brother or afriend, he ought to lay a whip across your shoulders.
By Jove!"
he continued, flushing up at the sight of the bitter sneer uponthe man's face, "it is not part of my duties to my client, buthere's a hunting crop handy, and I think I shall just treatmyself to--" He took two swift steps to the whip, but before hecould grasp it there was a wild clatter of steps upon the stairs,the heavy hall door banged, and from the window we could see Mr.James Windibank running at the top of his speed down the road.
"There's a cold-blooded scoundrel!"
said Holmes, laughing, as hethrew himself down into his chair once more.
"That fellow willrise from crime to crime until he does something very bad, andends on a gallows.
The case has, in some respects, been notentirely devoid of interest."
"I cannot now entirely see all the steps of your reasoning," Iremarked.
"Well, of course it was obvious from the first that this Mr.Hosmer Angel must have some strong object for his curiousconduct, and it was equally clear that the only man who reallyprofited by the incident, as far as we could see, was thestepfather.
Then the fact that the two men were never together,but that the one always appeared when the other was away, wassuggestive.
So were the tinted spectacles and the curious voice,which both hinted at a disguise, as did the bushy whiskers.
Mysuspicions were all confirmed by his peculiar action intypewriting his signature, which, of course, inferred that hishandwriting was so familiar to her that she would recognise eventhe smallest sample of it.
You see all these isolated facts,together with many minor ones, all pointed in the samedirection."
"And how did you verify them?"
"Having once spotted my man, it was easy to get corroboration.
Iknew the firm for which this man worked.
Having taken the printeddescription.
I eliminated everything from it which could be theresult of a disguise--the whiskers, the glasses, the voice, and Isent it to the firm, with a request that they would inform mewhether it answered to the description of any of theirtravellers.
I had already noticed the peculiarities of thetypewriter, and I wrote to the man himself at his businessaddress asking him if he would come here.
As I expected, hisreply was typewritten and revealed the same trivial butcharacteristic defects.
The same post brought me a letter fromWesthouse & Marbank, of Fenchurch Street, to say that thedescription tallied in every respect with that of their employé,James Windibank.
Voilà tout!"
"And Miss Sutherland?"
"If I tell her she will not believe me.
You may remember the oldPersian saying, 'There is danger for him who taketh the tigercub, and danger also for whoso snatches a delusion from a woman.'
There is as much sense in Hafiz as in Horace, and as muchknowledge of the world."
ADVENTURE IV.
THE BOSCOMBE VALLEY MYSTERYWe were seated at breakfast one morning, my wife and I, when themaid brought in a telegram.
It was from Sherlock Holmes and ranin this way:"Have you a couple of days to spare?
Have just been wired for fromthe west of England in connection with Boscombe Valley tragedy.
Shall be glad if you will come with me.
Air and scenery perfect.
Leave Paddington by the 11:15."
"What do you say, dear?"
said my wife, looking across at me.
"Will you go?"
"I really don't know what to say.
I have a fairly long list atpresent."
"Oh, Anstruther would do your work for you.
You have been lookinga little pale lately.
I think that the change would do you good,and you are always so interested in Mr. Sherlock Holmes' cases."
"I should be ungrateful if I were not, seeing what I gainedthrough one of them," I answered.
"But if I am to go, I must packat once, for I have only half an hour."
My experience of camp life in Afghanistan had at least had theeffect of making me a prompt and ready traveller.
My wants werefew and simple, so that in less than the time stated I was in acab with my valise, rattling away to Paddington Station.
SherlockHolmes was pacing up and down the platform, his tall, gauntfigure made even gaunter and taller by his long greytravelling-cloak and close-fitting cloth cap.
"It is really very good of you to come, Watson," said he.
"Itmakes a considerable difference to me, having someone with me onwhom I can thoroughly rely.
Local aid is always either worthlessor else biassed.
If you will keep the two corner seats I shallget the tickets."
We had the carriage to ourselves save for an immense litter ofpapers which Holmes had brought with him.
Among these he rummagedand read, with intervals of note-taking and of meditation, untilwe were past Reading.
Then he suddenly rolled them all into agigantic ball and tossed them up onto the rack.
"Have you heard anything of the case?"
he asked.
"Not a word.
I have not seen a paper for some days."
"The London press has not had very full accounts.
I have justbeen looking through all the recent papers in order to master theparticulars.
It seems, from what I gather, to be one of thosesimple cases which are so extremely difficult."
"That sounds a little paradoxical."
"But it is profoundly true.
Singularity is almost invariably aclue.
The more featureless and commonplace a crime is, the moredifficult it is to bring it home.
In this case, however, theyhave established a very serious case against the son of themurdered man."
"It is a murder, then?"
"Well, it is conjectured to be so.
I shall take nothing forgranted until I have the opportunity of looking personally intoit.
I will explain the state of things to you, as far as I havebeen able to understand it, in a very few words.
"Boscombe Valley is a country district not very far from Ross, inHerefordshire.
The largest landed proprietor in that part is aMr. John Turner, who made his money in Australia and returnedsome years ago to the old country.
One of the farms which heheld, that of Hatherley, was let to Mr. Charles McCarthy, who wasalso an ex-Australian.
The men had known each other in thecolonies, so that it was not unnatural that when they came tosettle down they should do so as near each other as possible.
Turner was apparently the richer man, so McCarthy became histenant but still remained, it seems, upon terms of perfectequality, as they were frequently together.
McCarthy had one son,a lad of eighteen, and Turner had an only daughter of the sameage, but neither of them had wives living.
They appear to haveavoided the society of the neighbouring English families and tohave led retired lives, though both the McCarthys were fond ofsport and were frequently seen at the race-meetings of theneighbourhood.
McCarthy kept two servants--a man and a girl.
Turner had a considerable household, some half-dozen at theleast.
That is as much as I have been able to gather about thefamilies.
Now for the facts.
"On June 3rd, that is, on Monday last, McCarthy left his house atHatherley about three in the afternoon and walked down to theBoscombe Pool, which is a small lake formed by the spreading outof the stream which runs down the Boscombe Valley.
He had beenout with his serving-man in the morning at Ross, and he had toldthe man that he must hurry, as he had an appointment ofimportance to keep at three.
From that appointment he never cameback alive.
"From Hatherley Farm-house to the Boscombe Pool is a quarter of amile, and two people saw him as he passed over this ground.
Onewas an old woman, whose name is not mentioned, and the other wasWilliam Crowder, a game-keeper in the employ of Mr. Turner.
Boththese witnesses depose that Mr. McCarthy was walking alone.
Thegame-keeper adds that within a few minutes of his seeing Mr.McCarthy pass he had seen his son, Mr. James McCarthy, going thesame way with a gun under his arm.
To the best of his belief, thefather was actually in sight at the time, and the son wasfollowing him.
He thought no more of the matter until he heard inthe evening of the tragedy that had occurred.
"The two McCarthys were seen after the time when William Crowder,the game-keeper, lost sight of them.
The Boscombe Pool is thicklywooded round, with just a fringe of grass and of reeds round theedge.
A girl of fourteen, Patience Moran, who is the daughter ofthe lodge-keeper of the Boscombe Valley estate, was in one of thewoods picking flowers.
She states that while she was there shesaw, at the border of the wood and close by the lake, Mr.McCarthy and his son, and that they appeared to be having aviolent quarrel.
She heard Mr. McCarthy the elder using verystrong language to his son, and she saw the latter raise up hishand as if to strike his father.
She was so frightened by theirviolence that she ran away and told her mother when she reachedhome that she had left the two McCarthys quarrelling nearBoscombe Pool, and that she was afraid that they were going tofight.
She had hardly said the words when young Mr. McCarthy camerunning up to the lodge to say that he had found his father deadin the wood, and to ask for the help of the lodge-keeper.
He wasmuch excited, without either his gun or his hat, and his righthand and sleeve were observed to be stained with fresh blood.
Onfollowing him they found the dead body stretched out upon thegrass beside the pool.
The head had been beaten in by repeatedblows of some heavy and blunt weapon.
The injuries were such asmight very well have been inflicted by the butt-end of his son'sgun, which was found lying on the grass within a few paces of thebody.
Under these circumstances the young man was instantlyarrested, and a verdict of 'wilful murder' having been returnedat the inquest on Tuesday, he was on Wednesday brought before themagistrates at Ross, who have referred the case to the nextAssizes.
Those are the main facts of the case as they came outbefore the coroner and the police-court."
"I could hardly imagine a more damning case," I remarked.
"Ifever circumstantial evidence pointed to a criminal it does sohere."
"Circumstantial evidence is a very tricky thing," answered Holmesthoughtfully.
"It may seem to point very straight to one thing,but if you shift your own point of view a little, you may find itpointing in an equally uncompromising manner to somethingentirely different.
It must be confessed, however, that the caselooks exceedingly grave against the young man, and it is verypossible that he is indeed the culprit.
There are several peoplein the neighbourhood, however, and among them Miss Turner, thedaughter of the neighbouring landowner, who believe in hisinnocence, and who have retained Lestrade, whom you may recollectin connection with the Study in Scarlet, to work out the case inhis interest.
Lestrade, being rather puzzled, has referred thecase to me, and hence it is that two middle-aged gentlemen areflying westward at fifty miles an hour instead of quietlydigesting their breakfasts at home."
"I am afraid," said I, "that the facts are so obvious that youwill find little credit to be gained out of this case."
"There is nothing more deceptive than an obvious fact," heanswered, laughing.
"Besides, we may chance to hit upon someother obvious facts which may have been by no means obvious toMr. Lestrade.
You know me too well to think that I am boastingwhen I say that I shall either confirm or destroy his theory bymeans which he is quite incapable of employing, or even ofunderstanding.
To take the first example to hand, I very clearlyperceive that in your bedroom the window is upon the right-handside, and yet I question whether Mr. Lestrade would have notedeven so self-evident a thing as that."
"How on earth--""My dear fellow, I know you well.
I know the military neatnesswhich characterises you.
You shave every morning, and in thisseason you shave by the sunlight; but since your shaving is lessand less complete as we get farther back on the left side, untilit becomes positively slovenly as we get round the angle of thejaw, it is surely very clear that that side is less illuminatedthan the other.
I could not imagine a man of your habits lookingat himself in an equal light and being satisfied with such aresult.
I only quote this as a trivial example of observation andinference.
Therein lies my métier, and it is just possible thatit may be of some service in the investigation which lies beforeus.
There are one or two minor points which were brought out inthe inquest, and which are worth considering."
"What are they?"
"It appears that his arrest did not take place at once, but afterthe return to Hatherley Farm.
On the inspector of constabularyinforming him that he was a prisoner, he remarked that he was notsurprised to hear it, and that it was no more than his deserts.
This observation of his had the natural effect of removing anytraces of doubt which might have remained in the minds of thecoroner's jury."
"It was a confession," I ejaculated.
"No, for it was followed by a protestation of innocence."
"Coming on the top of such a damning series of events, it was atleast a most suspicious remark."
"On the contrary," said Holmes, "it is the brightest rift which Ican at present see in the clouds.
However innocent he might be,he could not be such an absolute imbecile as not to see that thecircumstances were very black against him.
Had he appearedsurprised at his own arrest, or feigned indignation at it, Ishould have looked upon it as highly suspicious, because suchsurprise or anger would not be natural under the circumstances,and yet might appear to be the best policy to a scheming man.
Hisfrank acceptance of the situation marks him as either an innocentman, or else as a man of considerable self-restraint andfirmness.
As to his remark about his deserts, it was also notunnatural if you consider that he stood beside the dead body ofhis father, and that there is no doubt that he had that very dayso far forgotten his filial duty as to bandy words with him, andeven, according to the little girl whose evidence is soimportant, to raise his hand as if to strike him.
Theself-reproach and contrition which are displayed in his remarkappear to me to be the signs of a healthy mind rather than of aguilty one."
I shook my head.
"Many men have been hanged on far slighterevidence," I remarked.
"So they have.
And many men have been wrongfully hanged."
"What is the young man's own account of the matter?"
"It is, I am afraid, not very encouraging to his supporters,though there are one or two points in it which are suggestive.
You will find it here, and may read it for yourself."
He picked out from his bundle a copy of the local Herefordshirepaper, and having turned down the sheet he pointed out theparagraph in which the unfortunate young man had given his ownstatement of what had occurred.
I settled myself down in thecorner of the carriage and read it very carefully.
It ran in thisway:"Mr. James McCarthy, the only son of the deceased, was then calledand gave evidence as follows: 'I had been away from home forthree days at Bristol, and had only just returned upon themorning of last Monday, the 3rd.
My father was absent from home atthe time of my arrival, and I was informed by the maid that hehad driven over to Ross with John Cobb, the groom.
Shortly aftermy return I heard the wheels of his trap in the yard, and,looking out of my window, I saw him get out and walk rapidly outof the yard, though I was not aware in which direction he wasgoing.
I then took my gun and strolled out in the direction ofthe Boscombe Pool, with the intention of visiting the rabbitwarren which is upon the other side.
On my way I saw WilliamCrowder, the game-keeper, as he had stated in his evidence; buthe is mistaken in thinking that I was following my father.
I hadno idea that he was in front of me.
When about a hundred yardsfrom the pool I heard a cry of "Cooee!"
which was a usual signalbetween my father and myself.
I then hurried forward, and foundhim standing by the pool.
He appeared to be much surprised atseeing me and asked me rather roughly what I was doing there.
Aconversation ensued which led to high words and almost to blows,for my father was a man of a very violent temper.
Seeing that hispassion was becoming ungovernable, I left him and returnedtowards Hatherley Farm.
I had not gone more than 150 yards,however, when I heard a hideous outcry behind me, which caused meto run back again.
I found my father expiring upon the ground,with his head terribly injured.
I dropped my gun and held him inmy arms, but he almost instantly expired.
I knelt beside him forsome minutes, and then made my way to Mr. Turner's lodge-keeper,his house being the nearest, to ask for assistance.
I saw no onenear my father when I returned, and I have no idea how he came byhis injuries.
He was not a popular man, being somewhat cold andforbidding in his manners, but he had, as far as I know, noactive enemies.
I know nothing further of the matter.'
"The Coroner: Did your father make any statement to you beforehe died?
"Witness: He mumbled a few words, but I could only catch someallusion to a rat.
"The Coroner: What did you understand by that?
"Witness: It conveyed no meaning to me.
I thought that he wasdelirious.
"The Coroner: What was the point upon which you and your fatherhad this final quarrel?
"Witness: I should prefer not to answer.
"The Coroner: I am afraid that I must press it.
"Witness: It is really impossible for me to tell you.
I canassure you that it has nothing to do with the sad tragedy whichfollowed.
"The Coroner: That is for the court to decide.
I need not pointout to you that your refusal to answer will prejudice your caseconsiderably in any future proceedings which may arise.
"Witness: I must still refuse.
"The Coroner: I understand that the cry of 'Cooee' was a commonsignal between you and your father?
"Witness: It was.
"The Coroner: How was it, then, that he uttered it before he sawyou, and before he even knew that you had returned from Bristol?
"Witness (with considerable confusion): I do not know.
"A Juryman: Did you see nothing which aroused your suspicionswhen you returned on hearing the cry and found your fatherfatally injured?
"Witness: Nothing definite.
"The Coroner: What do you mean?
"Witness: I was so disturbed and excited as I rushed out intothe open, that I could think of nothing except of my father.
YetI have a vague impression that as I ran forward something layupon the ground to the left of me.
It seemed to me to besomething grey in colour, a coat of some sort, or a plaid perhaps.
When I rose from my father I looked round for it, but it wasgone.
"'Do you mean that it disappeared before you went for help?'
"'Yes, it was gone.'
"'You cannot say what it was?'
"'No, I had a feeling something was there.'
"'How far from the body?'
"'A dozen yards or so.'
"'And how far from the edge of the wood?'
"'About the same.'
"'Then if it was removed it was while you were within a dozenyards of it?'
"'Yes, but with my back towards it.'
"This concluded the examination of the witness."
"I see," said I as I glanced down the column, "that the coronerin his concluding remarks was rather severe upon young McCarthy.
He calls attention, and with reason, to the discrepancy about hisfather having signalled to him before seeing him, also to hisrefusal to give details of his conversation with his father, andhis singular account of his father's dying words.
They are all,as he remarks, very much against the son."
Holmes laughed softly to himself and stretched himself out uponthe cushioned seat.
"Both you and the coroner have been at somepains," said he, "to single out the very strongest points in theyoung man's favour.
Don't you see that you alternately give himcredit for having too much imagination and too little?
Toolittle, if he could not invent a cause of quarrel which wouldgive him the sympathy of the jury; too much, if he evolved fromhis own inner consciousness anything so outré as a dyingreference to a rat, and the incident of the vanishing cloth.
No,sir, I shall approach this case from the point of view that whatthis young man says is true, and we shall see whither thathypothesis will lead us.
And now here is my pocket Petrarch, andnot another word shall I say of this case until we are on thescene of action.
We lunch at Swindon, and I see that we shall bethere in twenty minutes."
It was nearly four o'clock when we at last, after passing throughthe beautiful Stroud Valley, and over the broad gleaming Severn,found ourselves at the pretty little country-town of Ross.
Alean, ferret-like man, furtive and sly-looking, was waiting forus upon the platform.
In spite of the light brown dustcoat andleather-leggings which he wore in deference to his rusticsurroundings, I had no difficulty in recognising Lestrade, ofScotland Yard.
With him we drove to the Hereford Arms where aroom had already been engaged for us.
"I have ordered a carriage," said Lestrade as we sat over a cupof tea.
"I knew your energetic nature, and that you would not behappy until you had been on the scene of the crime."
"It was very nice and complimentary of you," Holmes answered.
"Itis entirely a question of barometric pressure."
Lestrade looked startled.
"I do not quite follow," he said.
"How is the glass?
Twenty-nine, I see.
No wind, and not a cloudin the sky.
I have a caseful of cigarettes here which needsmoking, and the sofa is very much superior to the usual countryhotel abomination.
I do not think that it is probable that Ishall use the carriage to-night."
Lestrade laughed indulgently.
"You have, no doubt, already formedyour conclusions from the newspapers," he said.
"The case is asplain as a pikestaff, and the more one goes into it the plainerit becomes.
Still, of course, one can't refuse a lady, and such avery positive one, too.
She has heard of you, and would have youropinion, though I repeatedly told her that there was nothingwhich you could do which I had not already done.
Why, bless mysoul!
here is her carriage at the door."
He had hardly spoken before there rushed into the room one of themost lovely young women that I have ever seen in my life.
Herviolet eyes shining, her lips parted, a pink flush upon hercheeks, all thought of her natural reserve lost in heroverpowering excitement and concern.
"Oh, Mr. Sherlock Holmes!"
she cried, glancing from one to theother of us, and finally, with a woman's quick intuition,fastening upon my companion, "I am so glad that you have come.
Ihave driven down to tell you so.
I know that James didn't do it.
I know it, and I want you to start upon your work knowing it,too.
Never let yourself doubt upon that point.
We have known eachother since we were little children, and I know his faults as noone else does; but he is too tender-hearted to hurt a fly.
Such acharge is absurd to anyone who really knows him."
"I hope we may clear him, Miss Turner," said Sherlock Holmes.
"You may rely upon my doing all that I can."
"But you have read the evidence.
You have formed some conclusion?
Do you not see some loophole, some flaw?
Do you not yourselfthink that he is innocent?"
"I think that it is very probable."
"There, now!"
she cried, throwing back her head and lookingdefiantly at Lestrade.
"You hear!
He gives me hopes."
Lestrade shrugged his shoulders.
"I am afraid that my colleaguehas been a little quick in forming his conclusions," he said.
"But he is right.
Oh!
I know that he is right.
James never didit.
And about his quarrel with his father, I am sure that thereason why he would not speak about it to the coroner was becauseI was concerned in it."
"In what way?"
asked Holmes.
"It is no time for me to hide anything.
James and his father hadmany disagreements about me.
Mr. McCarthy was very anxious thatthere should be a marriage between us.
James and I have alwaysloved each other as brother and sister; but of course he is youngand has seen very little of life yet, and--and--well, henaturally did not wish to do anything like that yet.
So therewere quarrels, and this, I am sure, was one of them."
"And your father?"
asked Holmes.
"Was he in favour of such aunion?"
"No, he was averse to it also.
No one but Mr. McCarthy was infavour of it."
A quick blush passed over her fresh young face asHolmes shot one of his keen, questioning glances at her.
"Thank you for this information," said he.
"May I see your fatherif I call to-morrow?"
"I am afraid the doctor won't allow it."
"The doctor?"
"Yes, have you not heard?
Poor father has never been strong foryears back, but this has broken him down completely.
He has takento his bed, and Dr. Willows says that he is a wreck and that hisnervous system is shattered.
Mr. McCarthy was the only man alivewho had known dad in the old days in Victoria."
"Ha!
In Victoria!
That is important."
"Yes, at the mines."
"Quite so; at the gold-mines, where, as I understand, Mr. Turnermade his money."
"Yes, certainly."
"Thank you, Miss Turner.
You have been of material assistance tome."
"You will tell me if you have any news to-morrow.
No doubt youwill go to the prison to see James.
Oh, if you do, Mr. Holmes, dotell him that I know him to be innocent."
"I will, Miss Turner."
"I must go home now, for dad is very ill, and he misses me so ifI leave him.
Good-bye, and God help you in your undertaking."
Shehurried from the room as impulsively as she had entered, and weheard the wheels of her carriage rattle off down the street.
"I am ashamed of you, Holmes," said Lestrade with dignity after afew minutes' silence.
"Why should you raise up hopes which youare bound to disappoint?
I am not over-tender of heart, but Icall it cruel."
"I think that I see my way to clearing James McCarthy," saidHolmes.
"Have you an order to see him in prison?"
"Yes, but only for you and me."
"Then I shall reconsider my resolution about going out.
We havestill time to take a train to Hereford and see him to-night?"
"Ample."
"Then let us do so.
Watson, I fear that you will find it veryslow, but I shall only be away a couple of hours."
I walked down to the station with them, and then wandered throughthe streets of the little town, finally returning to the hotel,where I lay upon the sofa and tried to interest myself in ayellow-backed novel.
The puny plot of the story was so thin,however, when compared to the deep mystery through which we weregroping, and I found my attention wander so continually from theaction to the fact, that I at last flung it across the room andgave myself up entirely to a consideration of the events of theday.
Supposing that this unhappy young man's story wereabsolutely true, then what hellish thing, what absolutelyunforeseen and extraordinary calamity could have occurred betweenthe time when he parted from his father, and the moment when,drawn back by his screams, he rushed into the glade?
It wassomething terrible and deadly.
What could it be?
Might not thenature of the injuries reveal something to my medical instincts?
I rang the bell and called for the weekly county paper, whichcontained a verbatim account of the inquest.
In the surgeon'sdeposition it was stated that the posterior third of the leftparietal bone and the left half of the occipital bone had beenshattered by a heavy blow from a blunt weapon.
I marked the spotupon my own head.
Clearly such a blow must have been struck frombehind.
That was to some extent in favour of the accused, as whenseen quarrelling he was face to face with his father.
Still, itdid not go for very much, for the older man might have turned hisback before the blow fell.
Still, it might be worth while to callHolmes' attention to it.
Then there was the peculiar dyingreference to a rat.
What could that mean?
It could not bedelirium.
A man dying from a sudden blow does not commonly becomedelirious.
No, it was more likely to be an attempt to explain howhe met his fate.
But what could it indicate?
I cudgelled mybrains to find some possible explanation.
And then the incidentof the grey cloth seen by young McCarthy.
If that were true themurderer must have dropped some part of his dress, presumably hisovercoat, in his flight, and must have had the hardihood toreturn and to carry it away at the instant when the son waskneeling with his back turned not a dozen paces off.
What atissue of mysteries and improbabilities the whole thing was!
Idid not wonder at Lestrade's opinion, and yet I had so much faithin Sherlock Holmes' insight that I could not lose hope as longas every fresh fact seemed to strengthen his conviction of youngMcCarthy's innocence.
It was late before Sherlock Holmes returned.
He came back alone,for Lestrade was staying in lodgings in the town.
"The glass still keeps very high," he remarked as he sat down.
"It is of importance that it should not rain before we are ableto go over the ground.
On the other hand, a man should be at hisvery best and keenest for such nice work as that, and I did notwish to do it when fagged by a long journey.
I have seen youngMcCarthy."
"And what did you learn from him?"
"Nothing."
"Could he throw no light?"
"None at all.
I was inclined to think at one time that he knewwho had done it and was screening him or her, but I am convincednow that he is as puzzled as everyone else.
He is not a veryquick-witted youth, though comely to look at and, I should think,sound at heart."
"I cannot admire his taste," I remarked, "if it is indeed a factthat he was averse to a marriage with so charming a young lady asthis Miss Turner."
"Ah, thereby hangs a rather painful tale.
This fellow is madly,insanely, in love with her, but some two years ago, when he wasonly a lad, and before he really knew her, for she had been awayfive years at a boarding-school, what does the idiot do but getinto the clutches of a barmaid in Bristol and marry her at aregistry office?
No one knows a word of the matter, but you canimagine how maddening it must be to him to be upbraided for notdoing what he would give his very eyes to do, but what he knowsto be absolutely impossible.
It was sheer frenzy of this sortwhich made him throw his hands up into the air when his father,at their last interview, was goading him on to propose to MissTurner.
On the other hand, he had no means of supporting himself,and his father, who was by all accounts a very hard man, wouldhave thrown him over utterly had he known the truth.
It was withhis barmaid wife that he had spent the last three days inBristol, and his father did not know where he was.
Mark thatpoint.
It is of importance.
Good has come out of evil, however,for the barmaid, finding from the papers that he is in serioustrouble and likely to be hanged, has thrown him over utterly andhas written to him to say that she has a husband already in theBermuda Dockyard, so that there is really no tie between them.
Ithink that that bit of news has consoled young McCarthy for allthat he has suffered."
"But if he is innocent, who has done it?"
"Ah!
who?
I would call your attention very particularly to twopoints.
One is that the murdered man had an appointment withsomeone at the pool, and that the someone could not have been hisson, for his son was away, and he did not know when he wouldreturn.
The second is that the murdered man was heard to cry'Cooee!'
before he knew that his son had returned.
Those are thecrucial points upon which the case depends.
And now let us talkabout George Meredith, if you please, and we shall leave allminor matters until to-morrow."
There was no rain, as Holmes had foretold, and the morning brokebright and cloudless.
At nine o'clock Lestrade called for us withthe carriage, and we set off for Hatherley Farm and the BoscombePool.
"There is serious news this morning," Lestrade observed.
"It issaid that Mr. Turner, of the Hall, is so ill that his life isdespaired of."
"An elderly man, I presume?"
said Holmes.
"About sixty; but his constitution has been shattered by his lifeabroad, and he has been in failing health for some time.
Thisbusiness has had a very bad effect upon him.
He was an old friendof McCarthy's, and, I may add, a great benefactor to him, for Ihave learned that he gave him Hatherley Farm rent free."
"Indeed!
That is interesting," said Holmes.
"Oh, yes!
In a hundred other ways he has helped him.
Everybodyabout here speaks of his kindness to him."
"Really!
Does it not strike you as a little singular that thisMcCarthy, who appears to have had little of his own, and to havebeen under such obligations to Turner, should still talk ofmarrying his son to Turner's daughter, who is, presumably,heiress to the estate, and that in such a very cocksure manner,as if it were merely a case of a proposal and all else wouldfollow?
It is the more strange, since we know that Turner himselfwas averse to the idea.
The daughter told us as much.
Do you notdeduce something from that?"
"We have got to the deductions and the inferences," saidLestrade, winking at me.
"I find it hard enough to tackle facts,Holmes, without flying away after theories and fancies."
"You are right," said Holmes demurely; "you do find it very hardto tackle the facts."
"Anyhow, I have grasped one fact which you seem to find itdifficult to get hold of," replied Lestrade with some warmth.
"And that is--""That McCarthy senior met his death from McCarthy junior and thatall theories to the contrary are the merest moonshine."
"Well, moonshine is a brighter thing than fog," said Holmes,laughing.
"But I am very much mistaken if this is not HatherleyFarm upon the left."
"Yes, that is it."
It was a widespread, comfortable-lookingbuilding, two-storied, slate-roofed, with great yellow blotchesof lichen upon the grey walls.
The drawn blinds and the smokelesschimneys, however, gave it a stricken look, as though the weightof this horror still lay heavy upon it.
We called at the door,when the maid, at Holmes' request, showed us the boots which hermaster wore at the time of his death, and also a pair of theson's, though not the pair which he had then had.
Having measuredthese very carefully from seven or eight different points, Holmesdesired to be led to the court-yard, from which we all followedthe winding track which led to Boscombe Pool.
Sherlock Holmes was transformed when he was hot upon such a scentas this.
Men who had only known the quiet thinker and logician ofBaker Street would have failed to recognise him.
His face flushedand darkened.
His brows were drawn into two hard black lines,while his eyes shone out from beneath them with a steely glitter.
His face was bent downward, his shoulders bowed, his lipscompressed, and the veins stood out like whipcord in his long,sinewy neck.
His nostrils seemed to dilate with a purely animallust for the chase, and his mind was so absolutely concentratedupon the matter before him that a question or remark fellunheeded upon his ears, or, at the most, only provoked a quick,impatient snarl in reply.
Swiftly and silently he made his wayalong the track which ran through the meadows, and so by way ofthe woods to the Boscombe Pool.
It was damp, marshy ground, as isall that district, and there were marks of many feet, both uponthe path and amid the short grass which bounded it on eitherside.
Sometimes Holmes would hurry on, sometimes stop dead, andonce he made quite a little detour into the meadow.
Lestrade andI walked behind him, the detective indifferent and contemptuous,while I watched my friend with the interest which sprang from theconviction that every one of his actions was directed towards adefinite end.
The Boscombe Pool, which is a little reed-girt sheet of watersome fifty yards across, is situated at the boundary between theHatherley Farm and the private park of the wealthy Mr. Turner.
Above the woods which lined it upon the farther side we could seethe red, jutting pinnacles which marked the site of the richlandowner's dwelling.
On the Hatherley side of the pool the woodsgrew very thick, and there was a narrow belt of sodden grasstwenty paces across between the edge of the trees and the reedswhich lined the lake.
Lestrade showed us the exact spot at whichthe body had been found, and, indeed, so moist was the ground,that I could plainly see the traces which had been left by thefall of the stricken man.
To Holmes, as I could see by his eagerface and peering eyes, very many other things were to be readupon the trampled grass.
He ran round, like a dog who is pickingup a scent, and then turned upon my companion.
"What did you go into the pool for?"
he asked.
"I fished about with a rake.
I thought there might be some weaponor other trace.
But how on earth--""Oh, tut, tut!
I have no time!
That left foot of yours with itsinward twist is all over the place.
A mole could trace it, andthere it vanishes among the reeds.
Oh, how simple it would allhave been had I been here before they came like a herd of buffaloand wallowed all over it.
Here is where the party with thelodge-keeper came, and they have covered all tracks for six oreight feet round the body.
But here are three separate tracks ofthe same feet."
He drew out a lens and lay down upon hiswaterproof to have a better view, talking all the time rather tohimself than to us.
"These are young McCarthy's feet.
Twice hewas walking, and once he ran swiftly, so that the soles aredeeply marked and the heels hardly visible.
That bears out hisstory.
He ran when he saw his father on the ground.
Then here arethe father's feet as he paced up and down.
What is this, then?
Itis the butt-end of the gun as the son stood listening.
And this?
Ha, ha!
What have we here?
Tiptoes!
tiptoes!
Square, too, quiteunusual boots!
They come, they go, they come again--of coursethat was for the cloak.
Now where did they come from?"
He ran upand down, sometimes losing, sometimes finding the track until wewere well within the edge of the wood and under the shadow of agreat beech, the largest tree in the neighbourhood.
Holmes tracedhis way to the farther side of this and lay down once more uponhis face with a little cry of satisfaction.
For a long time heremained there, turning over the leaves and dried sticks,gathering up what seemed to me to be dust into an envelope andexamining with his lens not only the ground but even the bark ofthe tree as far as he could reach.
A jagged stone was lying amongthe moss, and this also he carefully examined and retained.
Thenhe followed a pathway through the wood until he came to thehighroad, where all traces were lost.
"It has been a case of considerable interest," he remarked,returning to his natural manner.
"I fancy that this grey house onthe right must be the lodge.
I think that I will go in and have aword with Moran, and perhaps write a little note.
Having donethat, we may drive back to our luncheon.
You may walk to the cab,and I shall be with you presently."
It was about ten minutes before we regained our cab and droveback into Ross, Holmes still carrying with him the stone which hehad picked up in the wood.
"This may interest you, Lestrade," he remarked, holding it out.
"The murder was done with it."
"I see no marks."
"There are none."
"How do you know, then?"
"The grass was growing under it.
It had only lain there a fewdays.
There was no sign of a place whence it had been taken.
Itcorresponds with the injuries.
There is no sign of any otherweapon."
"And the murderer?"
"Is a tall man, left-handed, limps with the right leg, wearsthick-soled shooting-boots and a grey cloak, smokes Indiancigars, uses a cigar-holder, and carries a blunt pen-knife in hispocket.
There are several other indications, but these may beenough to aid us in our search."
Lestrade laughed.
"I am afraid that I am still a sceptic," hesaid.
"Theories are all very well, but we have to deal with ahard-headed British jury."
"Nous verrons," answered Holmes calmly.
"You work your ownmethod, and I shall work mine.
I shall be busy this afternoon,and shall probably return to London by the evening train."
"And leave your case unfinished?"
"No, finished."
"But the mystery?"
"It is solved."
"Who was the criminal, then?"
"The gentleman I describe."
"But who is he?"
"Surely it would not be difficult to find out.
This is not such apopulous neighbourhood."
Lestrade shrugged his shoulders.
"I am a practical man," he said,"and I really cannot undertake to go about the country lookingfor a left-handed gentleman with a game leg.
I should become thelaughing-stock of Scotland Yard."
"All right," said Holmes quietly.
"I have given you the chance.
Here are your lodgings.
Good-bye.
I shall drop you a line beforeI leave."
Having left Lestrade at his rooms, we drove to our hotel, wherewe found lunch upon the table.
Holmes was silent and buried inthought with a pained expression upon his face, as one who findshimself in a perplexing position.
"Look here, Watson," he said when the cloth was cleared "just sitdown in this chair and let me preach to you for a little.
I don'tknow quite what to do, and I should value your advice.
Light acigar and let me expound."
"Pray do so."
"Well, now, in considering this case there are two points aboutyoung McCarthy's narrative which struck us both instantly,although they impressed me in his favour and you against him.
Onewas the fact that his father should, according to his account,cry 'Cooee!'
before seeing him.
The other was his singular dyingreference to a rat.
He mumbled several words, you understand, butthat was all that caught the son's ear.
Now from this doublepoint our research must commence, and we will begin it bypresuming that what the lad says is absolutely true."
"What of this 'Cooee!'
then?"
"Well, obviously it could not have been meant for the son.
Theson, as far as he knew, was in Bristol.
It was mere chance thathe was within earshot.
The 'Cooee!'
was meant to attract theattention of whoever it was that he had the appointment with.
But'Cooee' is a distinctly Australian cry, and one which is usedbetween Australians.
There is a strong presumption that theperson whom McCarthy expected to meet him at Boscombe Pool wassomeone who had been in Australia."
"What of the rat, then?"
Sherlock Holmes took a folded paper from his pocket and flattenedit out on the table.
"This is a map of the Colony of Victoria,"he said.
"I wired to Bristol for it last night."
He put his handover part of the map.
"What do you read?"
"ARAT," I read.
"And now?"
He raised his hand.
"BALLARAT."
"Quite so.
That was the word the man uttered, and of which hisson only caught the last two syllables.
He was trying to utterthe name of his murderer.
So and so, of Ballarat."
"It is wonderful!"
I exclaimed.
"It is obvious.
And now, you see, I had narrowed the field downconsiderably.
The possession of a grey garment was a third pointwhich, granting the son's statement to be correct, was acertainty.
We have come now out of mere vagueness to the definiteconception of an Australian from Ballarat with a grey cloak."
"Certainly."
"And one who was at home in the district, for the pool can onlybe approached by the farm or by the estate, where strangers couldhardly wander."
"Quite so."
"Then comes our expedition of to-day.
By an examination of theground I gained the trifling details which I gave to thatimbecile Lestrade, as to the personality of the criminal."
"But how did you gain them?"
"You know my method.
It is founded upon the observation oftrifles."
"His height I know that you might roughly judge from the lengthof his stride.
His boots, too, might be told from their traces."
"Yes, they were peculiar boots."
"But his lameness?"
"The impression of his right foot was always less distinct thanhis left.
He put less weight upon it.
Why?
Because he limped--hewas lame."
"But his left-handedness."
"You were yourself struck by the nature of the injury as recordedby the surgeon at the inquest.
The blow was struck fromimmediately behind, and yet was upon the left side.
Now, how canthat be unless it were by a left-handed man?
He had stood behindthat tree during the interview between the father and son.
He hadeven smoked there.
I found the ash of a cigar, which my specialknowledge of tobacco ashes enables me to pronounce as an Indiancigar.
I have, as you know, devoted some attention to this, andwritten a little monograph on the ashes of 140 differentvarieties of pipe, cigar, and cigarette tobacco.
Having found theash, I then looked round and discovered the stump among the mosswhere he had tossed it.
It was an Indian cigar, of the varietywhich are rolled in Rotterdam."
"And the cigar-holder?"
"I could see that the end had not been in his mouth.
Therefore heused a holder.
The tip had been cut off, not bitten off, but thecut was not a clean one, so I deduced a blunt pen-knife."
"Holmes," I said, "you have drawn a net round this man from whichhe cannot escape, and you have saved an innocent human life astruly as if you had cut the cord which was hanging him.
I see thedirection in which all this points.
The culprit is--""Mr. John Turner," cried the hotel waiter, opening the door ofour sitting-room, and ushering in a visitor.
The man who entered was a strange and impressive figure.
Hisslow, limping step and bowed shoulders gave the appearance ofdecrepitude, and yet his hard, deep-lined, craggy features, andhis enormous limbs showed that he was possessed of unusualstrength of body and of character.
His tangled beard, grizzledhair, and outstanding, drooping eyebrows combined to give an airof dignity and power to his appearance, but his face was of anashen white, while his lips and the corners of his nostrils weretinged with a shade of blue.
It was clear to me at a glance thathe was in the grip of some deadly and chronic disease.
"Pray sit down on the sofa," said Holmes gently.
"You had mynote?"
"Yes, the lodge-keeper brought it up.
You said that you wished tosee me here to avoid scandal."
"I thought people would talk if I went to the Hall."
"And why did you wish to see me?"
He looked across at mycompanion with despair in his weary eyes, as though his questionwas already answered.
"Yes," said Holmes, answering the look rather than the words.
"Itis so.
I know all about McCarthy."
The old man sank his face in his hands.
"God help me!"
he cried.
"But I would not have let the young man come to harm.
I give youmy word that I would have spoken out if it went against him atthe Assizes."
"I am glad to hear you say so," said Holmes gravely.
"I would have spoken now had it not been for my dear girl.
Itwould break her heart--it will break her heart when she hearsthat I am arrested."
"It may not come to that," said Holmes.
"What?"
"I am no official agent.
I understand that it was your daughterwho required my presence here, and I am acting in her interests.
Young McCarthy must be got off, however."
"I am a dying man," said old Turner.
"I have had diabetes foryears.
My doctor says it is a question whether I shall live amonth.
Yet I would rather die under my own roof than in a gaol."
Holmes rose and sat down at the table with his pen in his handand a bundle of paper before him.
"Just tell us the truth," hesaid.
"I shall jot down the facts.
You will sign it, and Watsonhere can witness it.
Then I could produce your confession at thelast extremity to save young McCarthy.
I promise you that I shallnot use it unless it is absolutely needed."
"It's as well," said the old man; "it's a question whether Ishall live to the Assizes, so it matters little to me, but Ishould wish to spare Alice the shock.
And now I will make thething clear to you; it has been a long time in the acting, butwill not take me long to tell.
"You didn't know this dead man, McCarthy.
He was a devilincarnate.
I tell you that.
God keep you out of the clutches ofsuch a man as he.
His grip has been upon me these twenty years,and he has blasted my life.
I'll tell you first how I came to bein his power.
"It was in the early '60's at the diggings.
I was a young chapthen, hot-blooded and reckless, ready to turn my hand atanything; I got among bad companions, took to drink, had no luckwith my claim, took to the bush, and in a word became what youwould call over here a highway robber.
There were six of us, andwe had a wild, free life of it, sticking up a station from timeto time, or stopping the wagons on the road to the diggings.
Black Jack of Ballarat was the name I went under, and our partyis still remembered in the colony as the Ballarat Gang.
"One day a gold convoy came down from Ballarat to Melbourne, andwe lay in wait for it and attacked it.
There were six troopersand six of us, so it was a close thing, but we emptied four oftheir saddles at the first volley.
Three of our boys were killed,however, before we got the swag.
I put my pistol to the head ofthe wagon-driver, who was this very man McCarthy.
I wish to theLord that I had shot him then, but I spared him, though I saw hiswicked little eyes fixed on my face, as though to remember everyfeature.
We got away with the gold, became wealthy men, and madeour way over to England without being suspected.
There I partedfrom my old pals and determined to settle down to a quiet andrespectable life.
I bought this estate, which chanced to be inthe market, and I set myself to do a little good with my money,to make up for the way in which I had earned it.
I married, too,and though my wife died young she left me my dear little Alice.
Even when she was just a baby her wee hand seemed to lead me downthe right path as nothing else had ever done.
In a word, I turnedover a new leaf and did my best to make up for the past.
All wasgoing well when McCarthy laid his grip upon me.
"I had gone up to town about an investment, and I met him inRegent Street with hardly a coat to his back or a boot to hisfoot.
"'Here we are, Jack,' says he, touching me on the arm; 'we'll beas good as a family to you.
There's two of us, me and my son, andyou can have the keeping of us.
If you don't--it's a fine,law-abiding country is England, and there's always a policemanwithin hail.'
"Well, down they came to the west country, there was no shakingthem off, and there they have lived rent free on my best landever since.
There was no rest for me, no peace, no forgetfulness;turn where I would, there was his cunning, grinning face at myelbow.
It grew worse as Alice grew up, for he soon saw I was moreafraid of her knowing my past than of the police.
Whatever hewanted he must have, and whatever it was I gave him withoutquestion, land, money, houses, until at last he asked a thingwhich I could not give.
He asked for Alice.
"His son, you see, had grown up, and so had my girl, and as I wasknown to be in weak health, it seemed a fine stroke to him thathis lad should step into the whole property.
But there I wasfirm.
I would not have his cursed stock mixed with mine; not thatI had any dislike to the lad, but his blood was in him, and thatwas enough.
I stood firm.
McCarthy threatened.
I braved him to dohis worst.
We were to meet at the pool midway between our housesto talk it over.
"When I went down there I found him talking with his son, so Ismoked a cigar and waited behind a tree until he should be alone.
But as I listened to his talk all that was black and bitter inme seemed to come uppermost.
He was urging his son to marry mydaughter with as little regard for what she might think as if shewere a slut from off the streets.
It drove me mad to think that Iand all that I held most dear should be in the power of such aman as this.
Could I not snap the bond?
I was already a dying anda desperate man.
Though clear of mind and fairly strong of limb,I knew that my own fate was sealed.
But my memory and my girl!
Both could be saved if I could but silence that foul tongue.
Idid it, Mr. Holmes.
I would do it again.
Deeply as I have sinned,I have led a life of martyrdom to atone for it.
But that my girlshould be entangled in the same meshes which held me was morethan I could suffer.
I struck him down with no more compunctionthan if he had been some foul and venomous beast.
His cry broughtback his son; but I had gained the cover of the wood, though Iwas forced to go back to fetch the cloak which I had dropped inmy flight.
That is the true story, gentlemen, of all thatoccurred."
"Well, it is not for me to judge you," said Holmes as the old mansigned the statement which had been drawn out.
"I pray that wemay never be exposed to such a temptation."
"I pray not, sir.
And what do you intend to do?"
"In view of your health, nothing.
You are yourself aware that youwill soon have to answer for your deed at a higher court than theAssizes.
I will keep your confession, and if McCarthy iscondemned I shall be forced to use it.
If not, it shall never beseen by mortal eye; and your secret, whether you be alive ordead, shall be safe with us."
"Farewell, then," said the old man solemnly.
"Your own deathbeds,when they come, will be the easier for the thought of the peacewhich you have given to mine."
Tottering and shaking in all hisgiant frame, he stumbled slowly from the room.
"God help us!"
said Holmes after a long silence.
"Why does fateplay such tricks with poor, helpless worms?
I never hear of sucha case as this that I do not think of Baxter's words, and say,'There, but for the grace of God, goes Sherlock Holmes.'"
James McCarthy was acquitted at the Assizes on the strength of anumber of objections which had been drawn out by Holmes andsubmitted to the defending counsel.
Old Turner lived for sevenmonths after our interview, but he is now dead; and there isevery prospect that the son and daughter may come to live happilytogether in ignorance of the black cloud which rests upon theirpast.
ADVENTURE V. THE FIVE ORANGE PIPSWhen I glance over my notes and records of the Sherlock Holmescases between the years '82 and '90, I am faced by so many whichpresent strange and interesting features that it is no easymatter to know which to choose and which to leave.
Some, however,have already gained publicity through the papers, and others havenot offered a field for those peculiar qualities which my friendpossessed in so high a degree, and which it is the object ofthese papers to illustrate.
Some, too, have baffled hisanalytical skill, and would be, as narratives, beginnings withoutan ending, while others have been but partially cleared up, andhave their explanations founded rather upon conjecture andsurmise than on that absolute logical proof which was so dear tohim.
There is, however, one of these last which was so remarkablein its details and so startling in its results that I am temptedto give some account of it in spite of the fact that there arepoints in connection with it which never have been, and probablynever will be, entirely cleared up.
The year '87 furnished us with a long series of cases of greateror less interest, of which I retain the records.
Among myheadings under this one twelve months I find an account of theadventure of the Paradol Chamber, of the Amateur MendicantSociety, who held a luxurious club in the lower vault of afurniture warehouse, of the facts connected with the loss of theBritish barque "Sophy Anderson", of the singular adventures of theGrice Patersons in the island of Uffa, and finally of theCamberwell poisoning case.
In the latter, as may be remembered,Sherlock Holmes was able, by winding up the dead man's watch, toprove that it had been wound up two hours before, and thattherefore the deceased had gone to bed within that time--adeduction which was of the greatest importance in clearing up thecase.
All these I may sketch out at some future date, but none ofthem present such singular features as the strange train ofcircumstances which I have now taken up my pen to describe.
It was in the latter days of September, and the equinoctial galeshad set in with exceptional violence.
All day the wind hadscreamed and the rain had beaten against the windows, so thateven here in the heart of great, hand-made London we were forcedto raise our minds for the instant from the routine of life andto recognise the presence of those great elemental forces whichshriek at mankind through the bars of his civilisation, likeuntamed beasts in a cage.
As evening drew in, the storm grewhigher and louder, and the wind cried and sobbed like a child inthe chimney.
Sherlock Holmes sat moodily at one side of thefireplace cross-indexing his records of crime, while I at theother was deep in one of Clark Russell's fine sea-stories untilthe howl of the gale from without seemed to blend with the text,and the splash of the rain to lengthen out into the long swash ofthe sea waves.
My wife was on a visit to her mother's, and for afew days I was a dweller once more in my old quarters at BakerStreet.
"Why," said I, glancing up at my companion, "that was surely thebell.
Who could come to-night?
Some friend of yours, perhaps?"
"Except yourself I have none," he answered.
"I do not encouragevisitors."
"A client, then?"
"If so, it is a serious case.
Nothing less would bring a man outon such a day and at such an hour.
But I take it that it is morelikely to be some crony of the landlady's."
Sherlock Holmes was wrong in his conjecture, however, for therecame a step in the passage and a tapping at the door.
Hestretched out his long arm to turn the lamp away from himself andtowards the vacant chair upon which a newcomer must sit.
"Come in!"
said he.
The man who entered was young, some two-and-twenty at theoutside, well-groomed and trimly clad, with something ofrefinement and delicacy in his bearing.
The streaming umbrellawhich he held in his hand, and his long shining waterproof toldof the fierce weather through which he had come.
He looked abouthim anxiously in the glare of the lamp, and I could see that hisface was pale and his eyes heavy, like those of a man who isweighed down with some great anxiety.
"I owe you an apology," he said, raising his golden pince-nez tohis eyes.
"I trust that I am not intruding.
I fear that I havebrought some traces of the storm and rain into your snugchamber."
"Give me your coat and umbrella," said Holmes.
"They may resthere on the hook and will be dry presently.
You have come up fromthe south-west, I see."
"Yes, from Horsham."
"That clay and chalk mixture which I see upon your toe caps isquite distinctive."
"I have come for advice."
"That is easily got."
"And help."
"That is not always so easy."
"I have heard of you, Mr. Holmes.
I heard from Major Prendergasthow you saved him in the Tankerville Club scandal."
"Ah, of course.
He was wrongfully accused of cheating at cards."
"He said that you could solve anything."
"He said too much."
"That you are never beaten."
"I have been beaten four times--three times by men, and once by awoman."
"But what is that compared with the number of your successes?"
"It is true that I have been generally successful."
"Then you may be so with me."
"I beg that you will draw your chair up to the fire and favour mewith some details as to your case."
"It is no ordinary one."
"None of those which come to me are.
I am the last court ofappeal."
"And yet I question, sir, whether, in all your experience, youhave ever listened to a more mysterious and inexplicable chain ofevents than those which have happened in my own family."
"You fill me with interest," said Holmes.
"Pray give us theessential facts from the commencement, and I can afterwardsquestion you as to those details which seem to me to be mostimportant."
The young man pulled his chair up and pushed his wet feet outtowards the blaze.
"My name," said he, "is John Openshaw, but my own affairs have,as far as I can understand, little to do with this awfulbusiness.
It is a hereditary matter; so in order to give you anidea of the facts, I must go back to the commencement of theaffair.
"You must know that my grandfather had two sons--my uncle Eliasand my father Joseph.
My father had a small factory at Coventry,which he enlarged at the time of the invention of bicycling.
Hewas a patentee of the Openshaw unbreakable tire, and his businessmet with such success that he was able to sell it and to retireupon a handsome competence.
"My uncle Elias emigrated to America when he was a young man andbecame a planter in Florida, where he was reported to have donevery well.
At the time of the war he fought in Jackson's army,and afterwards under Hood, where he rose to be a colonel.
WhenLee laid down his arms my uncle returned to his plantation, wherehe remained for three or four years.
About 1869 or 1870 he cameback to Europe and took a small estate in Sussex, near Horsham.
He had made a very considerable fortune in the States, and hisreason for leaving them was his aversion to the negroes, and hisdislike of the Republican policy in extending the franchise tothem.
He was a singular man, fierce and quick-tempered, veryfoul-mouthed when he was angry, and of a most retiringdisposition.
During all the years that he lived at Horsham, Idoubt if ever he set foot in the town.
He had a garden and two orthree fields round his house, and there he would take hisexercise, though very often for weeks on end he would never leavehis room.
He drank a great deal of brandy and smoked veryheavily, but he would see no society and did not want anyfriends, not even his own brother.
"He didn't mind me; in fact, he took a fancy to me, for at thetime when he saw me first I was a youngster of twelve or so.
Thiswould be in the year 1878, after he had been eight or nine yearsin England.
He begged my father to let me live with him and hewas very kind to me in his way.
When he was sober he used to befond of playing backgammon and draughts with me, and he wouldmake me his representative both with the servants and with thetradespeople, so that by the time that I was sixteen I was quitemaster of the house.
I kept all the keys and could go where Iliked and do what I liked, so long as I did not disturb him inhis privacy.
There was one singular exception, however, for hehad a single room, a lumber-room up among the attics, which wasinvariably locked, and which he would never permit either me oranyone else to enter.
With a boy's curiosity I have peepedthrough the keyhole, but I was never able to see more than such acollection of old trunks and bundles as would be expected in sucha room.
"One day--it was in March, 1883--a letter with a foreign stamplay upon the table in front of the colonel's plate.
It was not acommon thing for him to receive letters, for his bills were allpaid in ready money, and he had no friends of any sort.
'FromIndia!'
said he as he took it up, 'Pondicherry postmark!
What canthis be?'
Opening it hurriedly, out there jumped five littledried orange pips, which pattered down upon his plate.
I began tolaugh at this, but the laugh was struck from my lips at the sightof his face.
His lip had fallen, his eyes were protruding, hisskin the colour of putty, and he glared at the envelope which hestill held in his trembling hand, 'K.
K.
K.!'
he shrieked, andthen, 'My God, my God, my sins have overtaken me!'
"'What is it, uncle?'
I cried.
"'Death,' said he, and rising from the table he retired to hisroom, leaving me palpitating with horror.
I took up the envelopeand saw scrawled in red ink upon the inner flap, just above thegum, the letter K three times repeated.
There was nothing elsesave the five dried pips.
What could be the reason of hisoverpowering terror?
I left the breakfast-table, and as Iascended the stair I met him coming down with an old rusty key,which must have belonged to the attic, in one hand, and a smallbrass box, like a cashbox, in the other.
"'They may do what they like, but I'll checkmate them still,'said he with an oath.
'Tell Mary that I shall want a fire in myroom to-day, and send down to Fordham, the Horsham lawyer.'
"I did as he ordered, and when the lawyer arrived I was asked tostep up to the room.
The fire was burning brightly, and in thegrate there was a mass of black, fluffy ashes, as of burnedpaper, while the brass box stood open and empty beside it.
As Iglanced at the box I noticed, with a start, that upon the lid wasprinted the treble K which I had read in the morning upon theenvelope.
"'I wish you, John,' said my uncle, 'to witness my will.
I leavemy estate, with all its advantages and all its disadvantages, tomy brother, your father, whence it will, no doubt, descend toyou.
If you can enjoy it in peace, well and good!
If you find youcannot, take my advice, my boy, and leave it to your deadliestenemy.
I am sorry to give you such a two-edged thing, but I can'tsay what turn things are going to take.
Kindly sign the paperwhere Mr. Fordham shows you.'
"I signed the paper as directed, and the lawyer took it away withhim.
The singular incident made, as you may think, the deepestimpression upon me, and I pondered over it and turned it everyway in my mind without being able to make anything of it.
Yet Icould not shake off the vague feeling of dread which it leftbehind, though the sensation grew less keen as the weeks passedand nothing happened to disturb the usual routine of our lives.
Icould see a change in my uncle, however.
He drank more than ever,and he was less inclined for any sort of society.
Most of histime he would spend in his room, with the door locked upon theinside, but sometimes he would emerge in a sort of drunken frenzyand would burst out of the house and tear about the garden with arevolver in his hand, screaming out that he was afraid of no man,and that he was not to be cooped up, like a sheep in a pen, byman or devil.
When these hot fits were over, however, he wouldrush tumultuously in at the door and lock and bar it behind him,like a man who can brazen it out no longer against the terrorwhich lies at the roots of his soul.
At such times I have seenhis face, even on a cold day, glisten with moisture, as though itwere new raised from a basin.
"Well, to come to an end of the matter, Mr. Holmes, and not toabuse your patience, there came a night when he made one of thosedrunken sallies from which he never came back.
We found him, whenwe went to search for him, face downward in a littlegreen-scummed pool, which lay at the foot of the garden.
Therewas no sign of any violence, and the water was but two feet deep,so that the jury, having regard to his known eccentricity,brought in a verdict of 'suicide.'
But I, who knew how he wincedfrom the very thought of death, had much ado to persuade myselfthat he had gone out of his way to meet it.
The matter passed,however, and my father entered into possession of the estate, andof some 14,000 pounds, which lay to his credit at the bank."
"One moment," Holmes interposed, "your statement is, I foresee,one of the most remarkable to which I have ever listened.
Let mehave the date of the reception by your uncle of the letter, andthe date of his supposed suicide."
"The letter arrived on March 10, 1883.
His death was seven weekslater, upon the night of May 2nd."
"Thank you.
Pray proceed."
"When my father took over the Horsham property, he, at myrequest, made a careful examination of the attic, which had beenalways locked up.
We found the brass box there, although itscontents had been destroyed.
On the inside of the cover was apaper label, with the initials of K. K. K. repeated upon it, and'Letters, memoranda, receipts, and a register' written beneath.
These, we presume, indicated the nature of the papers which hadbeen destroyed by Colonel Openshaw.
For the rest, there wasnothing of much importance in the attic save a great manyscattered papers and note-books bearing upon my uncle's life inAmerica.
Some of them were of the war time and showed that he haddone his duty well and had borne the repute of a brave soldier.
Others were of a date during the reconstruction of the Southernstates, and were mostly concerned with politics, for he hadevidently taken a strong part in opposing the carpet-bagpoliticians who had been sent down from the North.
"Well, it was the beginning of '84 when my father came to live atHorsham, and all went as well as possible with us until theJanuary of '85.
On the fourth day after the new year I heard myfather give a sharp cry of surprise as we sat together at thebreakfast-table.
There he was, sitting with a newly openedenvelope in one hand and five dried orange pips in theoutstretched palm of the other one.
He had always laughed at whathe called my cock-and-bull story about the colonel, but he lookedvery scared and puzzled now that the same thing had come uponhimself.
"'Why, what on earth does this mean, John?'
he stammered.
"My heart had turned to lead.
'It is K. K. K.,' said I.
"He looked inside the envelope.
'So it is,' he cried.
'Here arethe very letters.
But what is this written above them?'
"'Put the papers on the sundial,' I read, peeping over hisshoulder.
"'What papers?
What sundial?'
he asked.
"'The sundial in the garden.
There is no other,' said I; 'but thepapers must be those that are destroyed.'
"'Pooh!'
said he, gripping hard at his courage.
'We are in acivilised land here, and we can't have tomfoolery of this kind.
Where does the thing come from?'
"'From Dundee,' I answered, glancing at the postmark.
"'Some preposterous practical joke,' said he.
'What have I to dowith sundials and papers?
I shall take no notice of suchnonsense.'
"'I should certainly speak to the police,' I said.
"'And be laughed at for my pains.
Nothing of the sort.'
"'Then let me do so?'
"'No, I forbid you.
I won't have a fuss made about suchnonsense.'
"It was in vain to argue with him, for he was a very obstinateman.
I went about, however, with a heart which was full offorebodings.
"On the third day after the coming of the letter my father wentfrom home to visit an old friend of his, Major Freebody, who isin command of one of the forts upon Portsdown Hill.
I was gladthat he should go, for it seemed to me that he was farther fromdanger when he was away from home.
In that, however, I was inerror.
Upon the second day of his absence I received a telegramfrom the major, imploring me to come at once.
My father hadfallen over one of the deep chalk-pits which abound in theneighbourhood, and was lying senseless, with a shattered skull.
Ihurried to him, but he passed away without having ever recoveredhis consciousness.
He had, as it appears, been returning fromFareham in the twilight, and as the country was unknown to him,and the chalk-pit unfenced, the jury had no hesitation inbringing in a verdict of 'death from accidental causes.'
Carefully as I examined every fact connected with his death, Iwas unable to find anything which could suggest the idea ofmurder.
There were no signs of violence, no footmarks, norobbery, no record of strangers having been seen upon the roads.
And yet I need not tell you that my mind was far from at ease,and that I was well-nigh certain that some foul plot had beenwoven round him.
"In this sinister way I came into my inheritance.
You will ask mewhy I did not dispose of it?
I answer, because I was wellconvinced that our troubles were in some way dependent upon anincident in my uncle's life, and that the danger would be aspressing in one house as in another.
"It was in January, '85, that my poor father met his end, and twoyears and eight months have elapsed since then.
During that timeI have lived happily at Horsham, and I had begun to hope thatthis curse had passed away from the family, and that it had endedwith the last generation.
I had begun to take comfort too soon,however; yesterday morning the blow fell in the very shape inwhich it had come upon my father."
The young man took from his waistcoat a crumpled envelope, andturning to the table he shook out upon it five little driedorange pips.
"This is the envelope," he continued.
"The postmark isLondon--eastern division.
Within are the very words which wereupon my father's last message: 'K.
K. K.'; and then 'Put thepapers on the sundial.'"
"What have you done?"
asked Holmes.
"Nothing."
"Nothing?"
"To tell the truth"--he sank his face into his thin, whitehands--"I have felt helpless.
I have felt like one of those poorrabbits when the snake is writhing towards it.
I seem to be inthe grasp of some resistless, inexorable evil, which no foresightand no precautions can guard against."
"Tut!
tut!"
cried Sherlock Holmes.
"You must act, man, or you arelost.
Nothing but energy can save you.
This is no time fordespair."
"I have seen the police."
"Ah!"
"But they listened to my story with a smile.
I am convinced thatthe inspector has formed the opinion that the letters are allpractical jokes, and that the deaths of my relations were reallyaccidents, as the jury stated, and were not to be connected withthe warnings."
Holmes shook his clenched hands in the air.
"Incredibleimbecility!"
he cried.
"They have, however, allowed me a policeman, who may remain inthe house with me."
"Has he come with you to-night?"
"No.
His orders were to stay in the house."
Again Holmes raved in the air.
"Why did you come to me," he cried, "and, above all, why did younot come at once?"
"I did not know.
It was only to-day that I spoke to MajorPrendergast about my troubles and was advised by him to come toyou."
"It is really two days since you had the letter.
We should haveacted before this.
You have no further evidence, I suppose, thanthat which you have placed before us--no suggestive detail whichmight help us?"
"There is one thing," said John Openshaw.
He rummaged in his coatpocket, and, drawing out a piece of discoloured, blue-tintedpaper, he laid it out upon the table.
"I have some remembrance,"said he, "that on the day when my uncle burned the papers Iobserved that the small, unburned margins which lay amid theashes were of this particular colour.
I found this single sheetupon the floor of his room, and I am inclined to think that itmay be one of the papers which has, perhaps, fluttered out fromamong the others, and in that way has escaped destruction.
Beyondthe mention of pips, I do not see that it helps us much.
I thinkmyself that it is a page from some private diary.
The writing isundoubtedly my uncle's."
Holmes moved the lamp, and we both bent over the sheet of paper,which showed by its ragged edge that it had indeed been torn froma book.
It was headed, "March, 1869," and beneath were thefollowing enigmatical notices:"4th.
Hudson came.
Same old platform.
"7th.
Set the pips on McCauley, Paramore, and      John Swain, of St. Augustine.
"9th.
McCauley cleared.
"10th.
John Swain cleared.
"12th.
Visited Paramore.
All well."
"Thank you!"
said Holmes, folding up the paper and returning itto our visitor.
"And now you must on no account lose anotherinstant.
We cannot spare time even to discuss what you have toldme.
You must get home instantly and act."
"What shall I do?"
"There is but one thing to do.
It must be done at once.
You mustput this piece of paper which you have shown us into the brassbox which you have described.
You must also put in a note to saythat all the other papers were burned by your uncle, and thatthis is the only one which remains.
You must assert that in suchwords as will carry conviction with them.
Having done this, youmust at once put the box out upon the sundial, as directed.
Doyou understand?"
"Entirely."
"Do not think of revenge, or anything of the sort, at present.
Ithink that we may gain that by means of the law; but we have ourweb to weave, while theirs is already woven.
The firstconsideration is to remove the pressing danger which threatensyou.
The second is to clear up the mystery and to punish theguilty parties."
"I thank you," said the young man, rising and pulling on hisovercoat.
"You have given me fresh life and hope.
I shallcertainly do as you advise."
"Do not lose an instant.
And, above all, take care of yourself inthe meanwhile, for I do not think that there can be a doubt thatyou are threatened by a very real and imminent danger.
How do yougo back?"
"By train from Waterloo."
"It is not yet nine.
The streets will be crowded, so I trust thatyou may be in safety.
And yet you cannot guard yourself tooclosely."
"I am armed."
"That is well.
To-morrow I shall set to work upon your case."
"I shall see you at Horsham, then?"
"No, your secret lies in London.
It is there that I shall seekit."
"Then I shall call upon you in a day, or in two days, with newsas to the box and the papers.
I shall take your advice in everyparticular."
He shook hands with us and took his leave.
Outsidethe wind still screamed and the rain splashed and patteredagainst the windows.
This strange, wild story seemed to have cometo us from amid the mad elements--blown in upon us like a sheetof sea-weed in a gale--and now to have been reabsorbed by themonce more.
Sherlock Holmes sat for some time in silence, with his head sunkforward and his eyes bent upon the red glow of the fire.
Then helit his pipe, and leaning back in his chair he watched the bluesmoke-rings as they chased each other up to the ceiling.
"I think, Watson," he remarked at last, "that of all our cases wehave had none more fantastic than this."
"Save, perhaps, the Sign of Four."
"Well, yes.
Save, perhaps, that.
And yet this John Openshaw seemsto me to be walking amid even greater perils than did theSholtos."
"But have you," I asked, "formed any definite conception as towhat these perils are?"
"There can be no question as to their nature," he answered.
"Then what are they?
Who is this K. K. K., and why does he pursuethis unhappy family?"
Sherlock Holmes closed his eyes and placed his elbows upon thearms of his chair, with his finger-tips together.
"The idealreasoner," he remarked, "would, when he had once been shown asingle fact in all its bearings, deduce from it not only all thechain of events which led up to it but also all the results whichwould follow from it.
As Cuvier could correctly describe a wholeanimal by the contemplation of a single bone, so the observer whohas thoroughly understood one link in a series of incidentsshould be able to accurately state all the other ones, bothbefore and after.
We have not yet grasped the results which thereason alone can attain to.
Problems may be solved in the studywhich have baffled all those who have sought a solution by theaid of their senses.
To carry the art, however, to its highestpitch, it is necessary that the reasoner should be able toutilise all the facts which have come to his knowledge; and thisin itself implies, as you will readily see, a possession of allknowledge, which, even in these days of free education andencyclopaedias, is a somewhat rare accomplishment.
It is not soimpossible, however, that a man should possess all knowledgewhich is likely to be useful to him in his work, and this I haveendeavoured in my case to do.
If I remember rightly, you on oneoccasion, in the early days of our friendship, defined my limitsin a very precise fashion."
"Yes," I answered, laughing.
"It was a singular document.
Philosophy, astronomy, and politics were marked at zero, Iremember.
Botany variable, geology profound as regards themud-stains from any region within fifty miles of town, chemistryeccentric, anatomy unsystematic, sensational literature and crimerecords unique, violin-player, boxer, swordsman, lawyer, andself-poisoner by cocaine and tobacco.
Those, I think, were themain points of my analysis."
Holmes grinned at the last item.
"Well," he said, "I say now, asI said then, that a man should keep his little brain-atticstocked with all the furniture that he is likely to use, and therest he can put away in the lumber-room of his library, where hecan get it if he wants it.
Now, for such a case as the one whichhas been submitted to us to-night, we need certainly to musterall our resources.
Kindly hand me down the letter K of the'American Encyclopaedia' which stands upon the shelf beside you.
Thank you.
Now let us consider the situation and see what may bededuced from it.
In the first place, we may start with a strongpresumption that Colonel Openshaw had some very strong reason forleaving America.
Men at his time of life do not change all theirhabits and exchange willingly the charming climate of Florida forthe lonely life of an English provincial town.
His extreme loveof solitude in England suggests the idea that he was in fear ofsomeone or something, so we may assume as a working hypothesisthat it was fear of someone or something which drove him fromAmerica.
As to what it was he feared, we can only deduce that byconsidering the formidable letters which were received by himselfand his successors.
Did you remark the postmarks of thoseletters?"
"The first was from Pondicherry, the second from Dundee, and thethird from London."
"From East London.
What do you deduce from that?"
"They are all seaports.
That the writer was on board of a ship."
"Excellent.
We have already a clue.
There can be no doubt thatthe probability--the strong probability--is that the writer wason board of a ship.
And now let us consider another point.
In thecase of Pondicherry, seven weeks elapsed between the threat andits fulfilment, in Dundee it was only some three or four days.
Does that suggest anything?"
"A greater distance to travel."
"But the letter had also a greater distance to come."
"Then I do not see the point."
"There is at least a presumption that the vessel in which the manor men are is a sailing-ship.
It looks as if they always sendtheir singular warning or token before them when starting upontheir mission.
You see how quickly the deed followed the signwhen it came from Dundee.
If they had come from Pondicherry in asteamer they would have arrived almost as soon as their letter.
But, as a matter of fact, seven weeks elapsed.
I think that thoseseven weeks represented the difference between the mail-boat whichbrought the letter and the sailing vessel which brought thewriter."
"It is possible."
"More than that.
It is probable.
And now you see the deadlyurgency of this new case, and why I urged young Openshaw tocaution.
The blow has always fallen at the end of the time whichit would take the senders to travel the distance.
But this onecomes from London, and therefore we cannot count upon delay."
"Good God!"
I cried.
"What can it mean, this relentlesspersecution?"
"The papers which Openshaw carried are obviously of vitalimportance to the person or persons in the sailing-ship.
I thinkthat it is quite clear that there must be more than one of them.
A single man could not have carried out two deaths in such a wayas to deceive a coroner's jury.
There must have been several init, and they must have been men of resource and determination.
Their papers they mean to have, be the holder of them who it may.
In this way you see K. K. K. ceases to be the initials of anindividual and becomes the badge of a society."
"But of what society?"
"Have you never--" said Sherlock Holmes, bending forward andsinking his voice--"have you never heard of the Ku Klux Klan?"
"I never have."
Holmes turned over the leaves of the book upon his knee.
"Here itis," said he presently:"'Ku Klux Klan.
A name derived from the fanciful resemblance tothe sound produced by cocking a rifle.
This terrible secretsociety was formed by some ex-Confederate soldiers in theSouthern states after the Civil War, and it rapidly formed localbranches in different parts of the country, notably in Tennessee,Louisiana, the Carolinas, Georgia, and Florida.
Its power wasused for political purposes, principally for the terrorising ofthe negro voters and the murdering and driving from the countryof those who were opposed to its views.
Its outrages were usuallypreceded by a warning sent to the marked man in some fantasticbut generally recognised shape--a sprig of oak-leaves in someparts, melon seeds or orange pips in others.
On receiving thisthe victim might either openly abjure his former ways, or mightfly from the country.
If he braved the matter out, death wouldunfailingly come upon him, and usually in some strange andunforeseen manner.
So perfect was the organisation of thesociety, and so systematic its methods, that there is hardly acase upon record where any man succeeded in braving it withimpunity, or in which any of its outrages were traced home to theperpetrators.
For some years the organisation flourished in spiteof the efforts of the United States government and of the betterclasses of the community in the South.
Eventually, in the year1869, the movement rather suddenly collapsed, although there havebeen sporadic outbreaks of the same sort since that date.'
"You will observe," said Holmes, laying down the volume, "thatthe sudden breaking up of the society was coincident with thedisappearance of Openshaw from America with their papers.
It maywell have been cause and effect.
It is no wonder that he and hisfamily have some of the more implacable spirits upon their track.
You can understand that this register and diary may implicatesome of the first men in the South, and that there may be manywho will not sleep easy at night until it is recovered."
"Then the page we have seen--""Is such as we might expect.
It ran, if I remember right, 'sentthe pips to A, B, and C'--that is, sent the society's warning tothem.
Then there are successive entries that A and B cleared, orleft the country, and finally that C was visited, with, I fear, asinister result for C. Well, I think, Doctor, that we may letsome light into this dark place, and I believe that the onlychance young Openshaw has in the meantime is to do what I havetold him.
There is nothing more to be said or to be doneto-night, so hand me over my violin and let us try to forget forhalf an hour the miserable weather and the still more miserableways of our fellow-men."
It had cleared in the morning, and the sun was shining with asubdued brightness through the dim veil which hangs over thegreat city.
Sherlock Holmes was already at breakfast when I camedown.
"You will excuse me for not waiting for you," said he; "I have, Iforesee, a very busy day before me in looking into this case ofyoung Openshaw's."
"What steps will you take?"
I asked.
"It will very much depend upon the results of my first inquiries.
I may have to go down to Horsham, after all."
"You will not go there first?"
"No, I shall commence with the City.
Just ring the bell and themaid will bring up your coffee."
As I waited, I lifted the unopened newspaper from the table andglanced my eye over it.
It rested upon a heading which sent achill to my heart.
"Holmes," I cried, "you are too late."
"Ah!"
said he, laying down his cup, "I feared as much.
How was itdone?"
He spoke calmly, but I could see that he was deeply moved.
"My eye caught the name of Openshaw, and the heading 'TragedyNear Waterloo Bridge.'
Here is the account:"Between nine and ten last night Police-Constable Cook, of the HDivision, on duty near Waterloo Bridge, heard a cry for help anda splash in the water.
The night, however, was extremely dark andstormy, so that, in spite of the help of several passers-by, itwas quite impossible to effect a rescue.
The alarm, however, wasgiven, and, by the aid of the water-police, the body waseventually recovered.
It proved to be that of a young gentlemanwhose name, as it appears from an envelope which was found in hispocket, was John Openshaw, and whose residence is near Horsham.
It is conjectured that he may have been hurrying down to catchthe last train from Waterloo Station, and that in his haste andthe extreme darkness he missed his path and walked over the edgeof one of the small landing-places for river steamboats.
The bodyexhibited no traces of violence, and there can be no doubt thatthe deceased had been the victim of an unfortunate accident,which should have the effect of calling the attention of theauthorities to the condition of the riverside landing-stages."
We sat in silence for some minutes, Holmes more depressed andshaken than I had ever seen him.
"That hurts my pride, Watson," he said at last.
"It is a pettyfeeling, no doubt, but it hurts my pride.
It becomes a personalmatter with me now, and, if God sends me health, I shall set myhand upon this gang.
That he should come to me for help, and thatI should send him away to his death--!"
He sprang from his chairand paced about the room in uncontrollable agitation, with aflush upon his sallow cheeks and a nervous clasping andunclasping of his long thin hands.
"They must be cunning devils," he exclaimed at last.
"How couldthey have decoyed him down there?
The Embankment is not on thedirect line to the station.
The bridge, no doubt, was toocrowded, even on such a night, for their purpose.
Well, Watson,we shall see who will win in the long run.
I am going out now!"
"To the police?"
"No; I shall be my own police.
When I have spun the web they maytake the flies, but not before."
All day I was engaged in my professional work, and it was late inthe evening before I returned to Baker Street.
Sherlock Holmeshad not come back yet.
It was nearly ten o'clock before heentered, looking pale and worn.
He walked up to the sideboard,and tearing a piece from the loaf he devoured it voraciously,washing it down with a long draught of water.
"You are hungry," I remarked.
"Starving.
It had escaped my memory.
I have had nothing sincebreakfast."
"Nothing?"
"Not a bite.
I had no time to think of it."
"And how have you succeeded?"
"Well."
"You have a clue?"
"I have them in the hollow of my hand.
Young Openshaw shall notlong remain unavenged.
Why, Watson, let us put their own devilishtrade-mark upon them.
It is well thought of!"
"What do you mean?"
He took an orange from the cupboard, and tearing it to pieces hesqueezed out the pips upon the table.
Of these he took five andthrust them into an envelope.
On the inside of the flap he wrote"S. H. for J.
O."
Then he sealed it and addressed it to "CaptainJames Calhoun, Barque 'Lone Star,' Savannah, Georgia."
"That will await him when he enters port," said he, chuckling.
"It may give him a sleepless night.
He will find it as sure aprecursor of his fate as Openshaw did before him."
"And who is this Captain Calhoun?"
"The leader of the gang.
I shall have the others, but he first."
"How did you trace it, then?"
He took a large sheet of paper from his pocket, all covered withdates and names.
"I have spent the whole day," said he, "over Lloyd's registersand files of the old papers, following the future career of everyvessel which touched at Pondicherry in January and February in'83.
There were thirty-six ships of fair tonnage which werereported there during those months.
Of these, one, the 'Lone Star,'instantly attracted my attention, since, although it was reportedas having cleared from London, the name is that which is given toone of the states of the Union."
"Texas, I think."
"I was not and am not sure which; but I knew that the ship musthave an American origin."
"What then?"
"I searched the Dundee records, and when I found that the barque'Lone Star' was there in January, '85, my suspicion became acertainty.
I then inquired as to the vessels which lay at presentin the port of London."
"Yes?"
"The 'Lone Star' had arrived here last week.
I went down to theAlbert Dock and found that she had been taken down the river bythe early tide this morning, homeward bound to Savannah.
I wiredto Gravesend and learned that she had passed some time ago, andas the wind is easterly I have no doubt that she is now past theGoodwins and not very far from the Isle of Wight."
"What will you do, then?"
"Oh, I have my hand upon him.
He and the two mates, are as Ilearn, the only native-born Americans in the ship.
The others areFinns and Germans.
I know, also, that they were all three awayfrom the ship last night.
I had it from the stevedore who hasbeen loading their cargo.
By the time that their sailing-shipreaches Savannah the mail-boat will have carried this letter, andthe cable will have informed the police of Savannah that thesethree gentlemen are badly wanted here upon a charge of murder."
There is ever a flaw, however, in the best laid of human plans,and the murderers of John Openshaw were never to receive theorange pips which would show them that another, as cunning and asresolute as themselves, was upon their track.
Very long and verysevere were the equinoctial gales that year.
We waited long fornews of the "Lone Star" of Savannah, but none ever reached us.
Wedid at last hear that somewhere far out in the Atlantic ashattered stern-post of a boat was seen swinging in the troughof a wave, with the letters "L. S." carved upon it, and that isall which we shall ever know of the fate of the "Lone Star."
ADVENTURE VI.
THE MAN WITH THE TWISTED LIPIsa Whitney, brother of the late Elias Whitney, D.D., Principalof the Theological College of St. George's, was much addicted toopium.
The habit grew upon him, as I understand, from somefoolish freak when he was at college; for having read DeQuincey's description of his dreams and sensations, he haddrenched his tobacco with laudanum in an attempt to produce thesame effects.
He found, as so many more have done, that thepractice is easier to attain than to get rid of, and for manyyears he continued to be a slave to the drug, an object ofmingled horror and pity to his friends and relatives.
I can seehim now, with yellow, pasty face, drooping lids, and pin-pointpupils, all huddled in a chair, the wreck and ruin of a nobleman.
One night--it was in June, '89--there came a ring to my bell,about the hour when a man gives his first yawn and glances at theclock.
I sat up in my chair, and my wife laid her needle-workdown in her lap and made a little face of disappointment.
"A patient!"
said she.
"You'll have to go out."
I groaned, for I was newly come back from a weary day.
We heard the door open, a few hurried words, and then quick stepsupon the linoleum.
Our own door flew open, and a lady, clad insome dark-coloured stuff, with a black veil, entered the room.
"You will excuse my calling so late," she began, and then,suddenly losing her self-control, she ran forward, threw her armsabout my wife's neck, and sobbed upon her shoulder.
"Oh, I'm insuch trouble!"
she cried; "I do so want a little help."
"Why," said my wife, pulling up her veil, "it is Kate Whitney.
How you startled me, Kate!
I had not an idea who you were whenyou came in."
"I didn't know what to do, so I came straight to you."
That wasalways the way.
Folk who were in grief came to my wife like birdsto a light-house.
"It was very sweet of you to come.
Now, you must have some wineand water, and sit here comfortably and tell us all about it.
Orshould you rather that I sent James off to bed?"
"Oh, no, no!
I want the doctor's advice and help, too.
It's aboutIsa.
He has not been home for two days.
I am so frightened abouthim!"
It was not the first time that she had spoken to us of herhusband's trouble, to me as a doctor, to my wife as an old friendand school companion.
We soothed and comforted her by such wordsas we could find.
Did she know where her husband was?
Was itpossible that we could bring him back to her?
It seems that it was.
She had the surest information that of latehe had, when the fit was on him, made use of an opium den in thefarthest east of the City.
Hitherto his orgies had always beenconfined to one day, and he had come back, twitching andshattered, in the evening.
But now the spell had been upon himeight-and-forty hours, and he lay there, doubtless among thedregs of the docks, breathing in the poison or sleeping off theeffects.
There he was to be found, she was sure of it, at the Barof Gold, in Upper Swandam Lane.
But what was she to do?
How couldshe, a young and timid woman, make her way into such a place andpluck her husband out from among the ruffians who surrounded him?
There was the case, and of course there was but one way out ofit.
Might I not escort her to this place?
And then, as a secondthought, why should she come at all?
I was Isa Whitney's medicaladviser, and as such I had influence over him.
I could manage itbetter if I were alone.
I promised her on my word that I wouldsend him home in a cab within two hours if he were indeed at theaddress which she had given me.
And so in ten minutes I had leftmy armchair and cheery sitting-room behind me, and was speedingeastward in a hansom on a strange errand, as it seemed to me atthe time, though the future only could show how strange it was tobe.
But there was no great difficulty in the first stage of myadventure.
Upper Swandam Lane is a vile alley lurking behind thehigh wharves which line the north side of the river to the eastof London Bridge.
Between a slop-shop and a gin-shop, approachedby a steep flight of steps leading down to a black gap like themouth of a cave, I found the den of which I was in search.
Ordering my cab to wait, I passed down the steps, worn hollow inthe centre by the ceaseless tread of drunken feet; and by thelight of a flickering oil-lamp above the door I found the latchand made my way into a long, low room, thick and heavy with thebrown opium smoke, and terraced with wooden berths, like theforecastle of an emigrant ship.
Through the gloom one could dimly catch a glimpse of bodies lyingin strange fantastic poses, bowed shoulders, bent knees, headsthrown back, and chins pointing upward, with here and there adark, lack-lustre eye turned upon the newcomer.
Out of the blackshadows there glimmered little red circles of light, now bright,now faint, as the burning poison waxed or waned in the bowls ofthe metal pipes.
The most lay silent, but some muttered tothemselves, and others talked together in a strange, low,monotonous voice, their conversation coming in gushes, and thensuddenly tailing off into silence, each mumbling out his ownthoughts and paying little heed to the words of his neighbour.
Atthe farther end was a small brazier of burning charcoal, besidewhich on a three-legged wooden stool there sat a tall, thin oldman, with his jaw resting upon his two fists, and his elbows uponhis knees, staring into the fire.
As I entered, a sallow Malay attendant had hurried up with a pipefor me and a supply of the drug, beckoning me to an empty berth.
"Thank you.
I have not come to stay," said I.
"There is a friendof mine here, Mr. Isa Whitney, and I wish to speak with him."
There was a movement and an exclamation from my right, andpeering through the gloom, I saw Whitney, pale, haggard, andunkempt, staring out at me.
"My God!
It's Watson," said he.
He was in a pitiable state ofreaction, with every nerve in a twitter.
"I say, Watson, whato'clock is it?"
"Nearly eleven."
"Of what day?"
"Of Friday, June 19th."
"Good heavens!
I thought it was Wednesday.
It is Wednesday.
Whatd'you want to frighten a chap for?"
He sank his face onto hisarms and began to sob in a high treble key.
"I tell you that it is Friday, man.
Your wife has been waitingthis two days for you.
You should be ashamed of yourself!"
"So I am.
But you've got mixed, Watson, for I have only been herea few hours, three pipes, four pipes--I forget how many.
But I'llgo home with you.
I wouldn't frighten Kate--poor little Kate.
Give me your hand!
Have you a cab?"
"Yes, I have one waiting."
"Then I shall go in it.
But I must owe something.
Find what Iowe, Watson.
I am all off colour.
I can do nothing for myself."
I walked down the narrow passage between the double row ofsleepers, holding my breath to keep out the vile, stupefyingfumes of the drug, and looking about for the manager.
As I passedthe tall man who sat by the brazier I felt a sudden pluck at myskirt, and a low voice whispered, "Walk past me, and then lookback at me."
The words fell quite distinctly upon my ear.
Iglanced down.
They could only have come from the old man at myside, and yet he sat now as absorbed as ever, very thin, verywrinkled, bent with age, an opium pipe dangling down from betweenhis knees, as though it had dropped in sheer lassitude from hisfingers.
I took two steps forward and looked back.
It took all myself-control to prevent me from breaking out into a cry ofastonishment.
He had turned his back so that none could see himbut I.
His form had filled out, his wrinkles were gone, the dulleyes had regained their fire, and there, sitting by the fire andgrinning at my surprise, was none other than Sherlock Holmes.
Hemade a slight motion to me to approach him, and instantly, as heturned his face half round to the company once more, subsidedinto a doddering, loose-lipped senility.
"Holmes!"
I whispered, "what on earth are you doing in this den?"
"As low as you can," he answered; "I have excellent ears.
If youwould have the great kindness to get rid of that sottish friendof yours I should be exceedingly glad to have a little talk withyou."
"I have a cab outside."
"Then pray send him home in it.
You may safely trust him, for heappears to be too limp to get into any mischief.
I shouldrecommend you also to send a note by the cabman to your wife tosay that you have thrown in your lot with me.
If you will waitoutside, I shall be with you in five minutes."
It was difficult to refuse any of Sherlock Holmes' requests, forthey were always so exceedingly definite, and put forward withsuch a quiet air of mastery.
I felt, however, that when Whitneywas once confined in the cab my mission was practicallyaccomplished; and for the rest, I could not wish anything betterthan to be associated with my friend in one of those singularadventures which were the normal condition of his existence.
In afew minutes I had written my note, paid Whitney's bill, led himout to the cab, and seen him driven through the darkness.
In avery short time a decrepit figure had emerged from the opium den,and I was walking down the street with Sherlock Holmes.
For twostreets he shuffled along with a bent back and an uncertain foot.
Then, glancing quickly round, he straightened himself out andburst into a hearty fit of laughter.
"I suppose, Watson," said he, "that you imagine that I have addedopium-smoking to cocaine injections, and all the other littleweaknesses on which you have favoured me with your medicalviews."
"I was certainly surprised to find you there."
"But not more so than I to find you."
"I came to find a friend."
"And I to find an enemy."
"An enemy?"
"Yes; one of my natural enemies, or, shall I say, my naturalprey.
Briefly, Watson, I am in the midst of a very remarkableinquiry, and I have hoped to find a clue in the incoherentramblings of these sots, as I have done before now.
Had I beenrecognised in that den my life would not have been worth anhour's purchase; for I have used it before now for my ownpurposes, and the rascally Lascar who runs it has sworn to havevengeance upon me.
There is a trap-door at the back of thatbuilding, near the corner of Paul's Wharf, which could tell somestrange tales of what has passed through it upon the moonlessnights."
"What!
You do not mean bodies?"
"Ay, bodies, Watson.
We should be rich men if we had 1000 poundsfor every poor devil who has been done to death in that den.
Itis the vilest murder-trap on the whole riverside, and I fear thatNeville St. Clair has entered it never to leave it more.
But ourtrap should be here."
He put his two forefingers between histeeth and whistled shrilly--a signal which was answered by asimilar whistle from the distance, followed shortly by the rattleof wheels and the clink of horses' hoofs.
"Now, Watson," said Holmes, as a tall dog-cart dashed up throughthe gloom, throwing out two golden tunnels of yellow light fromits side lanterns.
"You'll come with me, won't you?"
"If I can be of use."
"Oh, a trusty comrade is always of use; and a chronicler stillmore so.
My room at The Cedars is a double-bedded one."
"The Cedars?"
"Yes; that is Mr. St. Clair's house.
I am staying there while Iconduct the inquiry."
"Where is it, then?"
"Near Lee, in Kent.
We have a seven-mile drive before us."
"But I am all in the dark."
"Of course you are.
You'll know all about it presently.
Jump uphere.
All right, John; we shall not need you.
Here's half acrown.
Look out for me to-morrow, about eleven.
Give her herhead.
So long, then!"
He flicked the horse with his whip, and we dashed away throughthe endless succession of sombre and deserted streets, whichwidened gradually, until we were flying across a broadbalustraded bridge, with the murky river flowing sluggishlybeneath us.
Beyond lay another dull wilderness of bricks andmortar, its silence broken only by the heavy, regular footfall ofthe policeman, or the songs and shouts of some belated party ofrevellers.
A dull wrack was drifting slowly across the sky, and astar or two twinkled dimly here and there through the rifts ofthe clouds.
Holmes drove in silence, with his head sunk upon hisbreast, and the air of a man who is lost in thought, while I satbeside him, curious to learn what this new quest might be whichseemed to tax his powers so sorely, and yet afraid to break inupon the current of his thoughts.
We had driven several miles,and were beginning to get to the fringe of the belt of suburbanvillas, when he shook himself, shrugged his shoulders, and lit uphis pipe with the air of a man who has satisfied himself that heis acting for the best.
"You have a grand gift of silence, Watson," said he.
"It makesyou quite invaluable as a companion.
'Pon my word, it is a greatthing for me to have someone to talk to, for my own thoughts arenot over-pleasant.
I was wondering what I should say to this dearlittle woman to-night when she meets me at the door."
"You forget that I know nothing about it."
"I shall just have time to tell you the facts of the case beforewe get to Lee.
It seems absurdly simple, and yet, somehow I canget nothing to go upon.
There's plenty of thread, no doubt, but Ican't get the end of it into my hand.
Now, I'll state the caseclearly and concisely to you, Watson, and maybe you can see aspark where all is dark to me."
"Proceed, then."
"Some years ago--to be definite, in May, 1884--there came to Leea gentleman, Neville St. Clair by name, who appeared to haveplenty of money.
He took a large villa, laid out the grounds verynicely, and lived generally in good style.
By degrees he madefriends in the neighbourhood, and in 1887 he married the daughterof a local brewer, by whom he now has two children.
He had nooccupation, but was interested in several companies and went intotown as a rule in the morning, returning by the 5:14 from CannonStreet every night.
Mr. St. Clair is now thirty-seven years ofage, is a man of temperate habits, a good husband, a veryaffectionate father, and a man who is popular with all who knowhim.
I may add that his whole debts at the present moment, as faras we have been able to ascertain, amount to 88 pounds 10s., whilehe has 220 pounds standing to his credit in the Capital andCounties Bank.
There is no reason, therefore, to think that moneytroubles have been weighing upon his mind.
"Last Monday Mr. Neville St. Clair went into town rather earlierthan usual, remarking before he started that he had two importantcommissions to perform, and that he would bring his little boyhome a box of bricks.
Now, by the merest chance, his wifereceived a telegram upon this same Monday, very shortly after hisdeparture, to the effect that a small parcel of considerablevalue which she had been expecting was waiting for her at theoffices of the Aberdeen Shipping Company.
Now, if you are well upin your London, you will know that the office of the company isin Fresno Street, which branches out of Upper Swandam Lane, whereyou found me to-night.
Mrs. St. Clair had her lunch, started forthe City, did some shopping, proceeded to the company's office,got her packet, and found herself at exactly 4:35 walking throughSwandam Lane on her way back to the station.
Have you followed meso far?"
"It is very clear."
"If you remember, Monday was an exceedingly hot day, and Mrs. St.Clair walked slowly, glancing about in the hope of seeing a cab,as she did not like the neighbourhood in which she found herself.
While she was walking in this way down Swandam Lane, she suddenlyheard an ejaculation or cry, and was struck cold to see herhusband looking down at her and, as it seemed to her, beckoningto her from a second-floor window.
The window was open, and shedistinctly saw his face, which she describes as being terriblyagitated.
He waved his hands frantically to her, and thenvanished from the window so suddenly that it seemed to her thathe had been plucked back by some irresistible force from behind.
One singular point which struck her quick feminine eye was thatalthough he wore some dark coat, such as he had started to townin, he had on neither collar nor necktie.
"Convinced that something was amiss with him, she rushed down thesteps--for the house was none other than the opium den in whichyou found me to-night--and running through the front room sheattempted to ascend the stairs which led to the first floor.
Atthe foot of the stairs, however, she met this Lascar scoundrel ofwhom I have spoken, who thrust her back and, aided by a Dane, whoacts as assistant there, pushed her out into the street.
Filledwith the most maddening doubts and fears, she rushed down thelane and, by rare good-fortune, met in Fresno Street a number ofconstables with an inspector, all on their way to their beat.
Theinspector and two men accompanied her back, and in spite of thecontinued resistance of the proprietor, they made their way tothe room in which Mr. St. Clair had last been seen.
There was nosign of him there.
In fact, in the whole of that floor there wasno one to be found save a crippled wretch of hideous aspect, who,it seems, made his home there.
Both he and the Lascar stoutlyswore that no one else had been in the front room during theafternoon.
So determined was their denial that the inspector wasstaggered, and had almost come to believe that Mrs. St. Clair hadbeen deluded when, with a cry, she sprang at a small deal boxwhich lay upon the table and tore the lid from it.
Out there fella cascade of children's bricks.
It was the toy which he hadpromised to bring home.
"This discovery, and the evident confusion which the crippleshowed, made the inspector realise that the matter was serious.
The rooms were carefully examined, and results all pointed to anabominable crime.
The front room was plainly furnished as asitting-room and led into a small bedroom, which looked out uponthe back of one of the wharves.
Between the wharf and the bedroomwindow is a narrow strip, which is dry at low tide but is coveredat high tide with at least four and a half feet of water.
Thebedroom window was a broad one and opened from below.
Onexamination traces of blood were to be seen upon the windowsill,and several scattered drops were visible upon the wooden floor ofthe bedroom.
Thrust away behind a curtain in the front room wereall the clothes of Mr. Neville St. Clair, with the exception ofhis coat.
His boots, his socks, his hat, and his watch--all werethere.
There were no signs of violence upon any of thesegarments, and there were no other traces of Mr. Neville St.Clair.
Out of the window he must apparently have gone for noother exit could be discovered, and the ominous bloodstains uponthe sill gave little promise that he could save himself byswimming, for the tide was at its very highest at the moment ofthe tragedy.
"And now as to the villains who seemed to be immediatelyimplicated in the matter.
The Lascar was known to be a man of thevilest antecedents, but as, by Mrs. St. Clair's story, he wasknown to have been at the foot of the stair within a very fewseconds of her husband's appearance at the window, he couldhardly have been more than an accessory to the crime.
His defencewas one of absolute ignorance, and he protested that he had noknowledge as to the doings of Hugh Boone, his lodger, and that hecould not account in any way for the presence of the missinggentleman's clothes.
"So much for the Lascar manager.
Now for the sinister cripple wholives upon the second floor of the opium den, and who wascertainly the last human being whose eyes rested upon Neville St.Clair.
His name is Hugh Boone, and his hideous face is one whichis familiar to every man who goes much to the City.
He is aprofessional beggar, though in order to avoid the policeregulations he pretends to a small trade in wax vestas.
Somelittle distance down Threadneedle Street, upon the left-handside, there is, as you may have remarked, a small angle in thewall.
Here it is that this creature takes his daily seat,cross-legged with his tiny stock of matches on his lap, and as heis a piteous spectacle a small rain of charity descends into thegreasy leather cap which lies upon the pavement beside him.
Ihave watched the fellow more than once before ever I thought ofmaking his professional acquaintance, and I have been surprisedat the harvest which he has reaped in a short time.
Hisappearance, you see, is so remarkable that no one can pass himwithout observing him.
A shock of orange hair, a pale facedisfigured by a horrible scar, which, by its contraction, hasturned up the outer edge of his upper lip, a bulldog chin, and apair of very penetrating dark eyes, which present a singularcontrast to the colour of his hair, all mark him out from amidthe common crowd of mendicants and so, too, does his wit, for heis ever ready with a reply to any piece of chaff which may bethrown at him by the passers-by.
This is the man whom we nowlearn to have been the lodger at the opium den, and to have beenthe last man to see the gentleman of whom we are in quest."
"But a cripple!"
said I.
"What could he have done single-handedagainst a man in the prime of life?"
"He is a cripple in the sense that he walks with a limp; but inother respects he appears to be a powerful and well-nurtured man.
Surely your medical experience would tell you, Watson, thatweakness in one limb is often compensated for by exceptionalstrength in the others."
"Pray continue your narrative."
"Mrs. St. Clair had fainted at the sight of the blood upon thewindow, and she was escorted home in a cab by the police, as herpresence could be of no help to them in their investigations.
Inspector Barton, who had charge of the case, made a very carefulexamination of the premises, but without finding anything whichthrew any light upon the matter.
One mistake had been made in notarresting Boone instantly, as he was allowed some few minutesduring which he might have communicated with his friend theLascar, but this fault was soon remedied, and he was seized andsearched, without anything being found which could incriminatehim.
There were, it is true, some blood-stains upon his rightshirt-sleeve, but he pointed to his ring-finger, which had beencut near the nail, and explained that the bleeding came fromthere, adding that he had been to the window not long before, andthat the stains which had been observed there came doubtless fromthe same source.
He denied strenuously having ever seen Mr.Neville St. Clair and swore that the presence of the clothes inhis room was as much a mystery to him as to the police.
As toMrs. St. Clair's assertion that she had actually seen her husbandat the window, he declared that she must have been either mad ordreaming.
He was removed, loudly protesting, to thepolice-station, while the inspector remained upon the premises inthe hope that the ebbing tide might afford some fresh clue.
"And it did, though they hardly found upon the mud-bank what theyhad feared to find.
It was Neville St. Clair's coat, and notNeville St. Clair, which lay uncovered as the tide receded.
Andwhat do you think they found in the pockets?"
"I cannot imagine."
"No, I don't think you would guess.
Every pocket stuffed withpennies and half-pennies--421 pennies and 270 half-pennies.
Itwas no wonder that it had not been swept away by the tide.
But ahuman body is a different matter.
There is a fierce eddy betweenthe wharf and the house.
It seemed likely enough that theweighted coat had remained when the stripped body had been suckedaway into the river."
"But I understand that all the other clothes were found in theroom.
Would the body be dressed in a coat alone?"
"No, sir, but the facts might be met speciously enough.
Supposethat this man Boone had thrust Neville St. Clair through thewindow, there is no human eye which could have seen the deed.
What would he do then?
It would of course instantly strike himthat he must get rid of the tell-tale garments.
He would seizethe coat, then, and be in the act of throwing it out, when itwould occur to him that it would swim and not sink.
He has littletime, for he has heard the scuffle downstairs when the wife triedto force her way up, and perhaps he has already heard from hisLascar confederate that the police are hurrying up the street.
There is not an instant to be lost.
He rushes to some secrethoard, where he has accumulated the fruits of his beggary, and hestuffs all the coins upon which he can lay his hands into thepockets to make sure of the coat's sinking.
He throws it out, andwould have done the same with the other garments had not he heardthe rush of steps below, and only just had time to close thewindow when the police appeared."
"It certainly sounds feasible."
"Well, we will take it as a working hypothesis for want of abetter.
Boone, as I have told you, was arrested and taken to thestation, but it could not be shown that there had ever beforebeen anything against him.
He had for years been known as aprofessional beggar, but his life appeared to have been a veryquiet and innocent one.
There the matter stands at present, andthe questions which have to be solved--what Neville St. Clair wasdoing in the opium den, what happened to him when there, where ishe now, and what Hugh Boone had to do with his disappearance--areall as far from a solution as ever.
I confess that I cannotrecall any case within my experience which looked at the firstglance so simple and yet which presented such difficulties."
While Sherlock Holmes had been detailing this singular series ofevents, we had been whirling through the outskirts of the greattown until the last straggling houses had been left behind, andwe rattled along with a country hedge upon either side of us.
Just as he finished, however, we drove through two scatteredvillages, where a few lights still glimmered in the windows.
"We are on the outskirts of Lee," said my companion.
"We havetouched on three English counties in our short drive, starting inMiddlesex, passing over an angle of Surrey, and ending in Kent.
See that light among the trees?
That is The Cedars, and besidethat lamp sits a woman whose anxious ears have already, I havelittle doubt, caught the clink of our horse's feet."
"But why are you not conducting the case from Baker Street?"
Iasked.
"Because there are many inquiries which must be made out here.
Mrs. St. Clair has most kindly put two rooms at my disposal, andyou may rest assured that she will have nothing but a welcome formy friend and colleague.
I hate to meet her, Watson, when I haveno news of her husband.
Here we are.
Whoa, there, whoa!"
We had pulled up in front of a large villa which stood within itsown grounds.
A stable-boy had run out to the horse's head, andspringing down, I followed Holmes up the small, windinggravel-drive which led to the house.
As we approached, the doorflew open, and a little blonde woman stood in the opening, cladin some sort of light mousseline de soie, with a touch of fluffypink chiffon at her neck and wrists.
She stood with her figureoutlined against the flood of light, one hand upon the door, onehalf-raised in her eagerness, her body slightly bent, her headand face protruded, with eager eyes and parted lips, a standingquestion.
"Well?"
she cried, "well?"
And then, seeing that there were twoof us, she gave a cry of hope which sank into a groan as she sawthat my companion shook his head and shrugged his shoulders.
"No good news?"
"None."
"No bad?"
"No."
"Thank God for that.
But come in.
You must be weary, for you havehad a long day."
"This is my friend, Dr. Watson.
He has been of most vital use tome in several of my cases, and a lucky chance has made itpossible for me to bring him out and associate him with thisinvestigation."
"I am delighted to see you," said she, pressing my hand warmly.
"You will, I am sure, forgive anything that may be wanting in ourarrangements, when you consider the blow which has come sosuddenly upon us."
"My dear madam," said I, "I am an old campaigner, and if I werenot I can very well see that no apology is needed.
If I can be ofany assistance, either to you or to my friend here, I shall beindeed happy."
"Now, Mr. Sherlock Holmes," said the lady as we entered awell-lit dining-room, upon the table of which a cold supper hadbeen laid out, "I should very much like to ask you one or twoplain questions, to which I beg that you will give a plainanswer."
"Certainly, madam."
"Do not trouble about my feelings.
I am not hysterical, nor givento fainting.
I simply wish to hear your real, real opinion."
"Upon what point?"
"In your heart of hearts, do you think that Neville is alive?"
Sherlock Holmes seemed to be embarrassed by the question.
"Frankly, now!"
she repeated, standing upon the rug and lookingkeenly down at him as he leaned back in a basket-chair.
"Frankly, then, madam, I do not."
"You think that he is dead?"
"I do."
"Murdered?"
"I don't say that.
Perhaps."
"And on what day did he meet his death?"
"On Monday."
"Then perhaps, Mr. Holmes, you will be good enough to explain howit is that I have received a letter from him to-day."
Sherlock Holmes sprang out of his chair as if he had beengalvanised.
"What!"
he roared.
"Yes, to-day."
She stood smiling, holding up a little slip ofpaper in the air.
"May I see it?"
"Certainly."
He snatched it from her in his eagerness, and smoothing it outupon the table he drew over the lamp and examined it intently.
Ihad left my chair and was gazing at it over his shoulder.
Theenvelope was a very coarse one and was stamped with the Gravesendpostmark and with the date of that very day, or rather of the daybefore, for it was considerably after midnight.
"Coarse writing," murmured Holmes.
"Surely this is not yourhusband's writing, madam."
"No, but the enclosure is."
"I perceive also that whoever addressed the envelope had to goand inquire as to the address."
"How can you tell that?"
"The name, you see, is in perfectly black ink, which has drieditself.
The rest is of the greyish colour, which shows thatblotting-paper has been used.
If it had been written straightoff, and then blotted, none would be of a deep black shade.
Thisman has written the name, and there has then been a pause beforehe wrote the address, which can only mean that he was notfamiliar with it.
It is, of course, a trifle, but there isnothing so important as trifles.
Let us now see the letter.
Ha!
there has been an enclosure here!"
"Yes, there was a ring.
His signet-ring."
"And you are sure that this is your husband's hand?"
"One of his hands."
"One?"
"His hand when he wrote hurriedly.
It is very unlike his usualwriting, and yet I know it well."
"'Dearest do not be frightened.
All will come well.
There is ahuge error which it may take some little time to rectify.
Wait in patience.--NEVILLE.'
Written in pencil upon the fly-leafof a book, octavo size, no water-mark.
Hum!
Posted to-day inGravesend by a man with a dirty thumb.
Ha!
And the flap has beengummed, if I am not very much in error, by a person who had beenchewing tobacco.
And you have no doubt that it is your husband'shand, madam?"
"None.
Neville wrote those words."
"And they were posted to-day at Gravesend.
Well, Mrs. St. Clair,the clouds lighten, though I should not venture to say that thedanger is over."
"But he must be alive, Mr.
Holmes."
"Unless this is a clever forgery to put us on the wrong scent.
The ring, after all, proves nothing.
It may have been taken fromhim."
"No, no; it is, it is his very own writing!"
"Very well.
It may, however, have been written on Monday and onlyposted to-day."
"That is possible."
"If so, much may have happened between."
"Oh, you must not discourage me, Mr. Holmes.
I know that all iswell with him.
There is so keen a sympathy between us that Ishould know if evil came upon him.
On the very day that I saw himlast he cut himself in the bedroom, and yet I in the dining-roomrushed upstairs instantly with the utmost certainty thatsomething had happened.
Do you think that I would respond to sucha trifle and yet be ignorant of his death?"
"I have seen too much not to know that the impression of a womanmay be more valuable than the conclusion of an analyticalreasoner.
And in this letter you certainly have a very strongpiece of evidence to corroborate your view.
But if your husbandis alive and able to write letters, why should he remain awayfrom you?"
"I cannot imagine.
It is unthinkable."
"And on Monday he made no remarks before leaving you?"
"No."
"And you were surprised to see him in Swandam Lane?"
"Very much so."
"Was the window open?"
"Yes."
"Then he might have called to you?"
"He might."
"He only, as I understand, gave an inarticulate cry?"
"Yes."
"A call for help, you thought?"
"Yes.
He waved his hands."
"But it might have been a cry of surprise.
Astonishment at theunexpected sight of you might cause him to throw up his hands?"
"It is possible."
"And you thought he was pulled back?"
"He disappeared so suddenly."
"He might have leaped back.
You did not see anyone else in theroom?"
"No, but this horrible man confessed to having been there, andthe Lascar was at the foot of the stairs."
"Quite so.
Your husband, as far as you could see, had hisordinary clothes on?"
"But without his collar or tie.
I distinctly saw his barethroat."
"Had he ever spoken of Swandam Lane?"
"Never."
"Had he ever showed any signs of having taken opium?"
"Never."
"Thank you, Mrs. St. Clair.
Those are the principal points aboutwhich I wished to be absolutely clear.
We shall now have a littlesupper and then retire, for we may have a very busy dayto-morrow."
A large and comfortable double-bedded room had been placed at ourdisposal, and I was quickly between the sheets, for I was wearyafter my night of adventure.
Sherlock Holmes was a man, however,who, when he had an unsolved problem upon his mind, would go fordays, and even for a week, without rest, turning it over,rearranging his facts, looking at it from every point of viewuntil he had either fathomed it or convinced himself that hisdata were insufficient.
It was soon evident to me that he was nowpreparing for an all-night sitting.
He took off his coat andwaistcoat, put on a large blue dressing-gown, and then wanderedabout the room collecting pillows from his bed and cushions fromthe sofa and armchairs.
With these he constructed a sort ofEastern divan, upon which he perched himself cross-legged, withan ounce of shag tobacco and a box of matches laid out in frontof him.
In the dim light of the lamp I saw him sitting there, anold briar pipe between his lips, his eyes fixed vacantly upon thecorner of the ceiling, the blue smoke curling up from him,silent, motionless, with the light shining upon his strong-setaquiline features.
So he sat as I dropped off to sleep, and so hesat when a sudden ejaculation caused me to wake up, and I foundthe summer sun shining into the apartment.
The pipe was stillbetween his lips, the smoke still curled upward, and the room wasfull of a dense tobacco haze, but nothing remained of the heap ofshag which I had seen upon the previous night.
"Awake, Watson?"
he asked.
"Yes."
"Game for a morning drive?"
"Certainly."
"Then dress.
No one is stirring yet, but I know where thestable-boy sleeps, and we shall soon have the trap out."
Hechuckled to himself as he spoke, his eyes twinkled, and he seemeda different man to the sombre thinker of the previous night.
As I dressed I glanced at my watch.
It was no wonder that no onewas stirring.
It was twenty-five minutes past four.
I had hardlyfinished when Holmes returned with the news that the boy wasputting in the horse.
"I want to test a little theory of mine," said he, pulling on hisboots.
"I think, Watson, that you are now standing in thepresence of one of the most absolute fools in Europe.
I deserveto be kicked from here to Charing Cross.
But I think I have thekey of the affair now."
"And where is it?"
I asked, smiling.
"In the bathroom," he answered.
"Oh, yes, I am not joking," hecontinued, seeing my look of incredulity.
"I have just beenthere, and I have taken it out, and I have got it in thisGladstone bag.
Come on, my boy, and we shall see whether it willnot fit the lock."
We made our way downstairs as quietly as possible, and out intothe bright morning sunshine.
In the road stood our horse andtrap, with the half-clad stable-boy waiting at the head.
We bothsprang in, and away we dashed down the London Road.
A few countrycarts were stirring, bearing in vegetables to the metropolis, butthe lines of villas on either side were as silent and lifeless assome city in a dream.
"It has been in some points a singular case," said Holmes,flicking the horse on into a gallop.
"I confess that I have beenas blind as a mole, but it is better to learn wisdom late thannever to learn it at all."
In town the earliest risers were just beginning to look sleepilyfrom their windows as we drove through the streets of the Surreyside.
Passing down the Waterloo Bridge Road we crossed over theriver, and dashing up Wellington Street wheeled sharply to theright and found ourselves in Bow Street.
Sherlock Holmes was wellknown to the force, and the two constables at the door salutedhim.
One of them held the horse's head while the other led us in.
"Who is on duty?"
asked Holmes.
"Inspector Bradstreet, sir."
"Ah, Bradstreet, how are you?"
A tall, stout official had comedown the stone-flagged passage, in a peaked cap and froggedjacket.
"I wish to have a quiet word with you, Bradstreet."
"Certainly, Mr. Holmes.
Step into my room here."
It was a small,office-like room, with a huge ledger upon the table, and atelephone projecting from the wall.
The inspector sat down at hisdesk.
"What can I do for you, Mr.
Holmes?"
"I called about that beggarman, Boone--the one who was chargedwith being concerned in the disappearance of Mr. Neville St.Clair, of Lee."
"Yes.
He was brought up and remanded for further inquiries."
"So I heard.
You have him here?"
"In the cells."
"Is he quiet?"
"Oh, he gives no trouble.
But he is a dirty scoundrel."
"Dirty?"
"Yes, it is all we can do to make him wash his hands, and hisface is as black as a tinker's.
Well, when once his case has beensettled, he will have a regular prison bath; and I think, if yousaw him, you would agree with me that he needed it."
"I should like to see him very much."
"Would you?
That is easily done.
Come this way.
You can leaveyour bag."
"No, I think that I'll take it."
"Very good.
Come this way, if you please."
He led us down apassage, opened a barred door, passed down a winding stair, andbrought us to a whitewashed corridor with a line of doors on eachside.
"The third on the right is his," said the inspector.
"Here itis!"
He quietly shot back a panel in the upper part of the doorand glanced through.
"He is asleep," said he.
"You can see him very well."
We both put our eyes to the grating.
The prisoner lay with hisface towards us, in a very deep sleep, breathing slowly andheavily.
He was a middle-sized man, coarsely clad as became hiscalling, with a coloured shirt protruding through the rent in histattered coat.
He was, as the inspector had said, extremelydirty, but the grime which covered his face could not conceal itsrepulsive ugliness.
A broad wheal from an old scar ran rightacross it from eye to chin, and by its contraction had turned upone side of the upper lip, so that three teeth were exposed in aperpetual snarl.
A shock of very bright red hair grew low overhis eyes and forehead.
"He's a beauty, isn't he?"
said the inspector.
"He certainly needs a wash," remarked Holmes.
"I had an idea thathe might, and I took the liberty of bringing the tools with me."
He opened the Gladstone bag as he spoke, and took out, to myastonishment, a very large bath-sponge.
"He!
he!
You are a funny one," chuckled the inspector.
"Now, if you will have the great goodness to open that door veryquietly, we will soon make him cut a much more respectablefigure."
"Well, I don't know why not," said the inspector.
"He doesn'tlook a credit to the Bow Street cells, does he?"
He slipped hiskey into the lock, and we all very quietly entered the cell.
Thesleeper half turned, and then settled down once more into a deepslumber.
Holmes stooped to the water-jug, moistened his sponge,and then rubbed it twice vigorously across and down theprisoner's face.
"Let me introduce you," he shouted, "to Mr. Neville St. Clair, ofLee, in the county of Kent."
Never in my life have I seen such a sight.
The man's face peeledoff under the sponge like the bark from a tree.
Gone was thecoarse brown tint!
Gone, too, was the horrid scar which hadseamed it across, and the twisted lip which had given therepulsive sneer to the face!
A twitch brought away the tangledred hair, and there, sitting up in his bed, was a pale,sad-faced, refined-looking man, black-haired and smooth-skinned,rubbing his eyes and staring about him with sleepy bewilderment.
Then suddenly realising the exposure, he broke into a scream andthrew himself down with his face to the pillow.
"Great heavens!"
cried the inspector, "it is, indeed, the missingman.
I know him from the photograph."
The prisoner turned with the reckless air of a man who abandonshimself to his destiny.
"Be it so," said he.
"And pray what am Icharged with?"
"With making away with Mr. Neville St.-- Oh, come, you can't becharged with that unless they make a case of attempted suicide ofit," said the inspector with a grin.
"Well, I have beentwenty-seven years in the force, but this really takes the cake."
"If I am Mr. Neville St. Clair, then it is obvious that no crimehas been committed, and that, therefore, I am illegallydetained."
"No crime, but a very great error has been committed," saidHolmes.
"You would have done better to have trusted your wife."
"It was not the wife; it was the children," groaned the prisoner.
"God help me, I would not have them ashamed of their father.
MyGod!
What an exposure!
What can I do?"
Sherlock Holmes sat down beside him on the couch and patted himkindly on the shoulder.
"If you leave it to a court of law to clear the matter up," saidhe, "of course you can hardly avoid publicity.
On the other hand,if you convince the police authorities that there is no possiblecase against you, I do not know that there is any reason that thedetails should find their way into the papers.
InspectorBradstreet would, I am sure, make notes upon anything which youmight tell us and submit it to the proper authorities.
The casewould then never go into court at all."
"God bless you!"
cried the prisoner passionately.
"I would haveendured imprisonment, ay, even execution, rather than have leftmy miserable secret as a family blot to my children.
"You are the first who have ever heard my story.
My father was aschoolmaster in Chesterfield, where I received an excellenteducation.
I travelled in my youth, took to the stage, andfinally became a reporter on an evening paper in London.
One daymy editor wished to have a series of articles upon begging in themetropolis, and I volunteered to supply them.
There was the pointfrom which all my adventures started.
It was only by tryingbegging as an amateur that I could get the facts upon which tobase my articles.
When an actor I had, of course, learned all thesecrets of making up, and had been famous in the green-room formy skill.
I took advantage now of my attainments.
I painted myface, and to make myself as pitiable as possible I made a goodscar and fixed one side of my lip in a twist by the aid of asmall slip of flesh-coloured plaster.
Then with a red head ofhair, and an appropriate dress, I took my station in the businesspart of the city, ostensibly as a match-seller but really as abeggar.
For seven hours I plied my trade, and when I returnedhome in the evening I found to my surprise that I had received noless than 26s.
4d.
"I wrote my articles and thought little more of the matter until,some time later, I backed a bill for a friend and had a writserved upon me for 25 pounds.
I was at my wit's end where to getthe money, but a sudden idea came to me.
I begged a fortnight'sgrace from the creditor, asked for a holiday from my employers,and spent the time in begging in the City under my disguise.
Inten days I had the money and had paid the debt.
"Well, you can imagine how hard it was to settle down to arduouswork at 2 pounds a week when I knew that I could earn as much ina day by smearing my face with a little paint, laying my cap onthe ground, and sitting still.
It was a long fight between mypride and the money, but the dollars won at last, and I threw upreporting and sat day after day in the corner which I had firstchosen, inspiring pity by my ghastly face and filling my pocketswith coppers.
Only one man knew my secret.
He was the keeper of alow den in which I used to lodge in Swandam Lane, where I couldevery morning emerge as a squalid beggar and in the eveningstransform myself into a well-dressed man about town.
This fellow,a Lascar, was well paid by me for his rooms, so that I knew thatmy secret was safe in his possession.
"Well, very soon I found that I was saving considerable sums ofmoney.
I do not mean that any beggar in the streets of Londoncould earn 700 pounds a year--which is less than my averagetakings--but I had exceptional advantages in my power of makingup, and also in a facility of repartee, which improved bypractice and made me quite a recognised character in the City.
All day a stream of pennies, varied by silver, poured in upon me,and it was a very bad day in which I failed to take 2 pounds.
"As I grew richer I grew more ambitious, took a house in thecountry, and eventually married, without anyone having asuspicion as to my real occupation.
My dear wife knew that I hadbusiness in the City.
She little knew what.
"Last Monday I had finished for the day and was dressing in myroom above the opium den when I looked out of my window and saw,to my horror and astonishment, that my wife was standing in thestreet, with her eyes fixed full upon me.
I gave a cry ofsurprise, threw up my arms to cover my face, and, rushing to myconfidant, the Lascar, entreated him to prevent anyone fromcoming up to me.
I heard her voice downstairs, but I knew thatshe could not ascend.
Swiftly I threw off my clothes, pulled onthose of a beggar, and put on my pigments and wig.
Even a wife'seyes could not pierce so complete a disguise.
But then itoccurred to me that there might be a search in the room, and thatthe clothes might betray me.
I threw open the window, reopeningby my violence a small cut which I had inflicted upon myself inthe bedroom that morning.
Then I seized my coat, which wasweighted by the coppers which I had just transferred to it fromthe leather bag in which I carried my takings.
I hurled it out ofthe window, and it disappeared into the Thames.
The other clotheswould have followed, but at that moment there was a rush ofconstables up the stair, and a few minutes after I found, rather,I confess, to my relief, that instead of being identified as Mr.Neville St. Clair, I was arrested as his murderer.
"I do not know that there is anything else for me to explain.
Iwas determined to preserve my disguise as long as possible, andhence my preference for a dirty face.
Knowing that my wife wouldbe terribly anxious, I slipped off my ring and confided it to theLascar at a moment when no constable was watching me, togetherwith a hurried scrawl, telling her that she had no cause tofear."
"That note only reached her yesterday," said Holmes.
"Good God!
What a week she must have spent!"
"The police have watched this Lascar," said Inspector Bradstreet,"and I can quite understand that he might find it difficult topost a letter unobserved.
Probably he handed it to some sailorcustomer of his, who forgot all about it for some days."
"That was it," said Holmes, nodding approvingly; "I have no doubtof it.
But have you never been prosecuted for begging?"
"Many times; but what was a fine to me?"
"It must stop here, however," said Bradstreet.
"If the police areto hush this thing up, there must be no more of Hugh Boone."
"I have sworn it by the most solemn oaths which a man can take."
"In that case I think that it is probable that no further stepsmay be taken.
But if you are found again, then all must come out.
I am sure, Mr. Holmes, that we are very much indebted to you forhaving cleared the matter up.
I wish I knew how you reach yourresults."
"I reached this one," said my friend, "by sitting upon fivepillows and consuming an ounce of shag.
I think, Watson, that ifwe drive to Baker Street we shall just be in time for breakfast."
VII.
THE ADVENTURE OF THE BLUE CARBUNCLEI had called upon my friend Sherlock Holmes upon the secondmorning after Christmas, with the intention of wishing him thecompliments of the season.
He was lounging upon the sofa in apurple dressing-gown, a pipe-rack within his reach upon theright, and a pile of crumpled morning papers, evidently newlystudied, near at hand.
Beside the couch was a wooden chair, andon the angle of the back hung a very seedy and disreputablehard-felt hat, much the worse for wear, and cracked in severalplaces.
A lens and a forceps lying upon the seat of the chairsuggested that the hat had been suspended in this manner for thepurpose of examination.
"You are engaged," said I; "perhaps I interrupt you."
"Not at all.
I am glad to have a friend with whom I can discussmy results.
The matter is a perfectly trivial one"--he jerked histhumb in the direction of the old hat--"but there are points inconnection with it which are not entirely devoid of interest andeven of instruction."
I seated myself in his armchair and warmed my hands before hiscrackling fire, for a sharp frost had set in, and the windowswere thick with the ice crystals.
"I suppose," I remarked, "that,homely as it looks, this thing has some deadly story linked on toit--that it is the clue which will guide you in the solution ofsome mystery and the punishment of some crime."
"No, no.
No crime," said Sherlock Holmes, laughing.
"Only one ofthose whimsical little incidents which will happen when you havefour million human beings all jostling each other within thespace of a few square miles.
Amid the action and reaction of sodense a swarm of humanity, every possible combination of eventsmay be expected to take place, and many a little problem will bepresented which may be striking and bizarre without beingcriminal.
We have already had experience of such."
"So much so," I remarked, "that of the last six cases which Ihave added to my notes, three have been entirely free of anylegal crime."
"Precisely.
You allude to my attempt to recover the Irene Adlerpapers, to the singular case of Miss Mary Sutherland, and to theadventure of the man with the twisted lip.
Well, I have no doubtthat this small matter will fall into the same innocent category.
You know Peterson, the commissionaire?"
"Yes."
"It is to him that this trophy belongs."
"It is his hat."
"No, no, he found it.
Its owner is unknown.
I beg that you willlook upon it not as a battered billycock but as an intellectualproblem.
And, first, as to how it came here.
It arrived uponChristmas morning, in company with a good fat goose, which is, Ihave no doubt, roasting at this moment in front of Peterson'sfire.
The facts are these: about four o'clock on Christmasmorning, Peterson, who, as you know, is a very honest fellow, wasreturning from some small jollification and was making his wayhomeward down Tottenham Court Road.
In front of him he saw, inthe gaslight, a tallish man, walking with a slight stagger, andcarrying a white goose slung over his shoulder.
As he reached thecorner of Goodge Street, a row broke out between this strangerand a little knot of roughs.
One of the latter knocked off theman's hat, on which he raised his stick to defend himself and,swinging it over his head, smashed the shop window behind him.
Peterson had rushed forward to protect the stranger from hisassailants; but the man, shocked at having broken the window, andseeing an official-looking person in uniform rushing towards him,dropped his goose, took to his heels, and vanished amid thelabyrinth of small streets which lie at the back of TottenhamCourt Road.
The roughs had also fled at the appearance ofPeterson, so that he was left in possession of the field ofbattle, and also of the spoils of victory in the shape of thisbattered hat and a most unimpeachable Christmas goose."
"Which surely he restored to their owner?"
"My dear fellow, there lies the problem.
It is true that 'ForMrs. Henry Baker' was printed upon a small card which was tied tothe bird's left leg, and it is also true that the initials 'H.
B.'
are legible upon the lining of this hat, but as there aresome thousands of Bakers, and some hundreds of Henry Bakers inthis city of ours, it is not easy to restore lost property to anyone of them."
"What, then, did Peterson do?"
"He brought round both hat and goose to me on Christmas morning,knowing that even the smallest problems are of interest to me.
The goose we retained until this morning, when there were signsthat, in spite of the slight frost, it would be well that itshould be eaten without unnecessary delay.
Its finder has carriedit off, therefore, to fulfil the ultimate destiny of a goose,while I continue to retain the hat of the unknown gentleman wholost his Christmas dinner."
"Did he not advertise?"
"No."
"Then, what clue could you have as to his identity?"
"Only as much as we can deduce."
"From his hat?"
"Precisely."
"But you are joking.
What can you gather from this old batteredfelt?"
"Here is my lens.
You know my methods.
What can you gatheryourself as to the individuality of the man who has worn thisarticle?"
I took the tattered object in my hands and turned it over ratherruefully.
It was a very ordinary black hat of the usual roundshape, hard and much the worse for wear.
The lining had been ofred silk, but was a good deal discoloured.
There was no maker'sname; but, as Holmes had remarked, the initials "H.
B."
werescrawled upon one side.
It was pierced in the brim for ahat-securer, but the elastic was missing.
For the rest, it wascracked, exceedingly dusty, and spotted in several places,although there seemed to have been some attempt to hide thediscoloured patches by smearing them with ink.
"I can see nothing," said I, handing it back to my friend.
"On the contrary, Watson, you can see everything.
You fail,however, to reason from what you see.
You are too timid indrawing your inferences."
"Then, pray tell me what it is that you can infer from this hat?"
He picked it up and gazed at it in the peculiar introspectivefashion which was characteristic of him.
"It is perhaps lesssuggestive than it might have been," he remarked, "and yet thereare a few inferences which are very distinct, and a few otherswhich represent at least a strong balance of probability.
Thatthe man was highly intellectual is of course obvious upon theface of it, and also that he was fairly well-to-do within thelast three years, although he has now fallen upon evil days.
Hehad foresight, but has less now than formerly, pointing to amoral retrogression, which, when taken with the decline of hisfortunes, seems to indicate some evil influence, probably drink,at work upon him.
This may account also for the obvious fact thathis wife has ceased to love him."
"My dear Holmes!"
"He has, however, retained some degree of self-respect," hecontinued, disregarding my remonstrance.
"He is a man who leads asedentary life, goes out little, is out of training entirely, ismiddle-aged, has grizzled hair which he has had cut within thelast few days, and which he anoints with lime-cream.
These arethe more patent facts which are to be deduced from his hat.
Also,by the way, that it is extremely improbable that he has gas laidon in his house."
"You are certainly joking, Holmes."
"Not in the least.
Is it possible that even now, when I give youthese results, you are unable to see how they are attained?"
"I have no doubt that I am very stupid, but I must confess that Iam unable to follow you.
For example, how did you deduce thatthis man was intellectual?"
For answer Holmes clapped the hat upon his head.
It came rightover the forehead and settled upon the bridge of his nose.
"It isa question of cubic capacity," said he; "a man with so large abrain must have something in it."
"The decline of his fortunes, then?"
"This hat is three years old.
These flat brims curled at the edgecame in then.
It is a hat of the very best quality.
Look at theband of ribbed silk and the excellent lining.
If this man couldafford to buy so expensive a hat three years ago, and has had nohat since, then he has assuredly gone down in the world."
"Well, that is clear enough, certainly.
But how about theforesight and the moral retrogression?"
Sherlock Holmes laughed.
"Here is the foresight," said he puttinghis finger upon the little disc and loop of the hat-securer.
"They are never sold upon hats.
If this man ordered one, it is asign of a certain amount of foresight, since he went out of hisway to take this precaution against the wind.
But since we seethat he has broken the elastic and has not troubled to replaceit, it is obvious that he has less foresight now than formerly,which is a distinct proof of a weakening nature.
On the otherhand, he has endeavoured to conceal some of these stains upon thefelt by daubing them with ink, which is a sign that he has notentirely lost his self-respect."
"Your reasoning is certainly plausible."
"The further points, that he is middle-aged, that his hair isgrizzled, that it has been recently cut, and that he useslime-cream, are all to be gathered from a close examination of thelower part of the lining.
The lens discloses a large number ofhair-ends, clean cut by the scissors of the barber.
They allappear to be adhesive, and there is a distinct odour oflime-cream.
This dust, you will observe, is not the gritty, greydust of the street but the fluffy brown dust of the house,showing that it has been hung up indoors most of the time, whilethe marks of moisture upon the inside are proof positive that thewearer perspired very freely, and could therefore, hardly be inthe best of training."
"But his wife--you said that she had ceased to love him."
"This hat has not been brushed for weeks.
When I see you, my dearWatson, with a week's accumulation of dust upon your hat, andwhen your wife allows you to go out in such a state, I shall fearthat you also have been unfortunate enough to lose your wife'saffection."
"But he might be a bachelor."
"Nay, he was bringing home the goose as a peace-offering to hiswife.
Remember the card upon the bird's leg."
"You have an answer to everything.
But how on earth do you deducethat the gas is not laid on in his house?"
"One tallow stain, or even two, might come by chance; but when Isee no less than five, I think that there can be little doubtthat the individual must be brought into frequent contact withburning tallow--walks upstairs at night probably with his hat inone hand and a guttering candle in the other.
Anyhow, he nevergot tallow-stains from a gas-jet.
Are you satisfied?"
"Well, it is very ingenious," said I, laughing; "but since, asyou said just now, there has been no crime committed, and no harmdone save the loss of a goose, all this seems to be rather awaste of energy."
Sherlock Holmes had opened his mouth to reply, when the door flewopen, and Peterson, the commissionaire, rushed into the apartmentwith flushed cheeks and the face of a man who is dazed withastonishment.
"The goose, Mr. Holmes!
The goose, sir!"
he gasped.
"Eh?
What of it, then?
Has it returned to life and flapped offthrough the kitchen window?"
Holmes twisted himself round uponthe sofa to get a fairer view of the man's excited face.
"See here, sir!
See what my wife found in its crop!"
He held outhis hand and displayed upon the centre of the palm a brilliantlyscintillating blue stone, rather smaller than a bean in size, butof such purity and radiance that it twinkled like an electricpoint in the dark hollow of his hand.
Sherlock Holmes sat up with a whistle.
"By Jove, Peterson!"
saidhe, "this is treasure trove indeed.
I suppose you know what youhave got?"
"A diamond, sir?
A precious stone.
It cuts into glass as thoughit were putty."
"It's more than a precious stone.
It is the precious stone."
"Not the Countess of Morcar's blue carbuncle!"
I ejaculated.
"Precisely so.
I ought to know its size and shape, seeing that Ihave read the advertisement about it in The Times every daylately.
It is absolutely unique, and its value can only beconjectured, but the reward offered of 1000 pounds is certainlynot within a twentieth part of the market price."
"A thousand pounds!
Great Lord of mercy!"
The commissionaireplumped down into a chair and stared from one to the other of us.
"That is the reward, and I have reason to know that there aresentimental considerations in the background which would inducethe Countess to part with half her fortune if she could butrecover the gem."
"It was lost, if I remember aright, at the Hotel Cosmopolitan," Iremarked.
"Precisely so, on December 22nd, just five days ago.
John Horner,a plumber, was accused of having abstracted it from the lady'sjewel-case.
The evidence against him was so strong that the casehas been referred to the Assizes.
I have some account of thematter here, I believe."
He rummaged amid his newspapers,glancing over the dates, until at last he smoothed one out,doubled it over, and read the following paragraph:"Hotel Cosmopolitan Jewel Robbery.
John Horner, 26, plumber, wasbrought up upon the charge of having upon the 22nd inst.,abstracted from the jewel-case of the Countess of Morcar thevaluable gem known as the blue carbuncle.
James Ryder,upper-attendant at the hotel, gave his evidence to the effectthat he had shown Horner up to the dressing-room of the Countessof Morcar upon the day of the robbery in order that he mightsolder the second bar of the grate, which was loose.
He hadremained with Horner some little time, but had finally beencalled away.
On returning, he found that Horner had disappeared,that the bureau had been forced open, and that the small moroccocasket in which, as it afterwards transpired, the Countess wasaccustomed to keep her jewel, was lying empty upon thedressing-table.
Ryder instantly gave the alarm, and Horner wasarrested the same evening; but the stone could not be foundeither upon his person or in his rooms.
Catherine Cusack, maid tothe Countess, deposed to having heard Ryder's cry of dismay ondiscovering the robbery, and to having rushed into the room,where she found matters as described by the last witness.
Inspector Bradstreet, B division, gave evidence as to the arrestof Horner, who struggled frantically, and protested his innocencein the strongest terms.
Evidence of a previous conviction forrobbery having been given against the prisoner, the magistraterefused to deal summarily with the offence, but referred it tothe Assizes.
Horner, who had shown signs of intense emotionduring the proceedings, fainted away at the conclusion and wascarried out of court."
"Hum!
So much for the police-court," said Holmes thoughtfully,tossing aside the paper.
"The question for us now to solve is thesequence of events leading from a rifled jewel-case at one end tothe crop of a goose in Tottenham Court Road at the other.
Yousee, Watson, our little deductions have suddenly assumed a muchmore important and less innocent aspect.
Here is the stone; thestone came from the goose, and the goose came from Mr. HenryBaker, the gentleman with the bad hat and all the othercharacteristics with which I have bored you.
So now we must setourselves very seriously to finding this gentleman andascertaining what part he has played in this little mystery.
Todo this, we must try the simplest means first, and these lieundoubtedly in an advertisement in all the evening papers.
Ifthis fail, I shall have recourse to other methods."
"What will you say?"
"Give me a pencil and that slip of paper.
Now, then: 'Found atthe corner of Goodge Street, a goose and a black felt hat.
Mr.Henry Baker can have the same by applying at 6:30 this evening at221B, Baker Street.'
That is clear and concise."
"Very.
But will he see it?"
"Well, he is sure to keep an eye on the papers, since, to a poorman, the loss was a heavy one.
He was clearly so scared by hismischance in breaking the window and by the approach of Petersonthat he thought of nothing but flight, but since then he musthave bitterly regretted the impulse which caused him to drop hisbird.
Then, again, the introduction of his name will cause him tosee it, for everyone who knows him will direct his attention toit.
Here you are, Peterson, run down to the advertising agencyand have this put in the evening papers."
"In which, sir?"
"Oh, in the Globe, Star, Pall Mall, St. James's, Evening News,Standard, Echo, and any others that occur to you."
"Very well, sir.
And this stone?"
"Ah, yes, I shall keep the stone.
Thank you.
And, I say,Peterson, just buy a goose on your way back and leave it herewith me, for we must have one to give to this gentleman in placeof the one which your family is now devouring."
When the commissionaire had gone, Holmes took up the stone andheld it against the light.
"It's a bonny thing," said he.
"Justsee how it glints and sparkles.
Of course it is a nucleus andfocus of crime.
Every good stone is.
They are the devil's petbaits.
In the larger and older jewels every facet may stand for abloody deed.
This stone is not yet twenty years old.
It was foundin the banks of the Amoy River in southern China and is remarkablein having every characteristic of the carbuncle, save that it isblue in shade instead of ruby red.
In spite of its youth, it hasalready a sinister history.
There have been two murders, avitriol-throwing, a suicide, and several robberies brought aboutfor the sake of this forty-grain weight of crystallised charcoal.
Who would think that so pretty a toy would be a purveyor to thegallows and the prison?
I'll lock it up in my strong box now anddrop a line to the Countess to say that we have it."
"Do you think that this man Horner is innocent?"
"I cannot tell."
"Well, then, do you imagine that this other one, Henry Baker, hadanything to do with the matter?"
"It is, I think, much more likely that Henry Baker is anabsolutely innocent man, who had no idea that the bird which hewas carrying was of considerably more value than if it were madeof solid gold.
That, however, I shall determine by a very simpletest if we have an answer to our advertisement."
"And you can do nothing until then?"
"Nothing."
"In that case I shall continue my professional round.
But I shallcome back in the evening at the hour you have mentioned, for Ishould like to see the solution of so tangled a business."
"Very glad to see you.
I dine at seven.
There is a woodcock, Ibelieve.
By the way, in view of recent occurrences, perhaps Iought to ask Mrs. Hudson to examine its crop."
I had been delayed at a case, and it was a little after half-pastsix when I found myself in Baker Street once more.
As Iapproached the house I saw a tall man in a Scotch bonnet with acoat which was buttoned up to his chin waiting outside in thebright semicircle which was thrown from the fanlight.
Just as Iarrived the door was opened, and we were shown up together toHolmes' room.
"Mr. Henry Baker, I believe," said he, rising from his armchairand greeting his visitor with the easy air of geniality which hecould so readily assume.
"Pray take this chair by the fire, Mr.Baker.
It is a cold night, and I observe that your circulation ismore adapted for summer than for winter.
Ah, Watson, you havejust come at the right time.
Is that your hat, Mr.
Baker?"
"Yes, sir, that is undoubtedly my hat."
He was a large man with rounded shoulders, a massive head, and abroad, intelligent face, sloping down to a pointed beard ofgrizzled brown.
A touch of red in nose and cheeks, with a slighttremor of his extended hand, recalled Holmes' surmise as to hishabits.
His rusty black frock-coat was buttoned right up infront, with the collar turned up, and his lank wrists protrudedfrom his sleeves without a sign of cuff or shirt.
He spoke in aslow staccato fashion, choosing his words with care, and gave theimpression generally of a man of learning and letters who had hadill-usage at the hands of fortune.
"We have retained these things for some days," said Holmes,"because we expected to see an advertisement from you giving youraddress.
I am at a loss to know now why you did not advertise."
Our visitor gave a rather shamefaced laugh.
"Shillings have notbeen so plentiful with me as they once were," he remarked.
"I hadno doubt that the gang of roughs who assaulted me had carried offboth my hat and the bird.
I did not care to spend more money in ahopeless attempt at recovering them."
"Very naturally.
By the way, about the bird, we were compelled toeat it."
"To eat it!"
Our visitor half rose from his chair in hisexcitement.
"Yes, it would have been of no use to anyone had we not done so.
But I presume that this other goose upon the sideboard, which isabout the same weight and perfectly fresh, will answer yourpurpose equally well?"
"Oh, certainly, certainly," answered Mr. Baker with a sigh ofrelief.
"Of course, we still have the feathers, legs, crop, and so on ofyour own bird, so if you wish--"The man burst into a hearty laugh.
"They might be useful to me asrelics of my adventure," said he, "but beyond that I can hardlysee what use the disjecta membra of my late acquaintance aregoing to be to me.
No, sir, I think that, with your permission, Iwill confine my attentions to the excellent bird which I perceiveupon the sideboard."
Sherlock Holmes glanced sharply across at me with a slight shrugof his shoulders.
"There is your hat, then, and there your bird," said he.
"By theway, would it bore you to tell me where you got the other onefrom?
I am somewhat of a fowl fancier, and I have seldom seen abetter grown goose."
"Certainly, sir," said Baker, who had risen and tucked his newlygained property under his arm.
"There are a few of us whofrequent the Alpha Inn, near the Museum--we are to be found inthe Museum itself during the day, you understand.
This year ourgood host, Windigate by name, instituted a goose club, by which,on consideration of some few pence every week, we were each toreceive a bird at Christmas.
My pence were duly paid, and therest is familiar to you.
I am much indebted to you, sir, for aScotch bonnet is fitted neither to my years nor my gravity."
Witha comical pomposity of manner he bowed solemnly to both of us andstrode off upon his way.
"So much for Mr. Henry Baker," said Holmes when he had closed thedoor behind him.
"It is quite certain that he knows nothingwhatever about the matter.
Are you hungry, Watson?"
"Not particularly."
"Then I suggest that we turn our dinner into a supper and followup this clue while it is still hot."
"By all means."
It was a bitter night, so we drew on our ulsters and wrappedcravats about our throats.
Outside, the stars were shining coldlyin a cloudless sky, and the breath of the passers-by blew outinto smoke like so many pistol shots.
Our footfalls rang outcrisply and loudly as we swung through the doctors' quarter,Wimpole Street, Harley Street, and so through Wigmore Street intoOxford Street.
In a quarter of an hour we were in Bloomsbury atthe Alpha Inn, which is a small public-house at the corner of oneof the streets which runs down into Holborn.
Holmes pushed openthe door of the private bar and ordered two glasses of beer fromthe ruddy-faced, white-aproned landlord.
"Your beer should be excellent if it is as good as your geese,"said he.
"My geese!"
The man seemed surprised.
"Yes.
I was speaking only half an hour ago to Mr. Henry Baker,who was a member of your goose club."
"Ah!
yes, I see.
But you see, sir, them's not our geese."
"Indeed!
Whose, then?"
"Well, I got the two dozen from a salesman in Covent Garden."
"Indeed?
I know some of them.
Which was it?"
"Breckinridge is his name."
"Ah!
I don't know him.
Well, here's your good health landlord,and prosperity to your house.
Good-night."
"Now for Mr. Breckinridge," he continued, buttoning up his coatas we came out into the frosty air.
"Remember, Watson that thoughwe have so homely a thing as a goose at one end of this chain, wehave at the other a man who will certainly get seven years' penalservitude unless we can establish his innocence.
It is possiblethat our inquiry may but confirm his guilt; but, in any case, wehave a line of investigation which has been missed by the police,and which a singular chance has placed in our hands.
Let usfollow it out to the bitter end.
Faces to the south, then, andquick march!"
We passed across Holborn, down Endell Street, and so through azigzag of slums to Covent Garden Market.
One of the largeststalls bore the name of Breckinridge upon it, and the proprietora horsey-looking man, with a sharp face and trim side-whiskers washelping a boy to put up the shutters.
"Good-evening.
It's a cold night," said Holmes.
The salesman nodded and shot a questioning glance at mycompanion.
"Sold out of geese, I see," continued Holmes, pointing at thebare slabs of marble.
"Let you have five hundred to-morrow morning."
"That's no good."
"Well, there are some on the stall with the gas-flare."
"Ah, but I was recommended to you."
"Who by?"
"The landlord of the Alpha."
"Oh, yes; I sent him a couple of dozen."
"Fine birds they were, too.
Now where did you get them from?"
To my surprise the question provoked a burst of anger from thesalesman.
"Now, then, mister," said he, with his head cocked and his armsakimbo, "what are you driving at?
Let's have it straight, now."
"It is straight enough.
I should like to know who sold you thegeese which you supplied to the Alpha."
"Well then, I shan't tell you.
So now!"
"Oh, it is a matter of no importance; but I don't know why youshould be so warm over such a trifle."
"Warm!
You'd be as warm, maybe, if you were as pestered as I am.
When I pay good money for a good article there should be an endof the business; but it's 'Where are the geese?'
and 'Who did yousell the geese to?'
and 'What will you take for the geese?'
Onewould think they were the only geese in the world, to hear thefuss that is made over them."
"Well, I have no connection with any other people who have beenmaking inquiries," said Holmes carelessly.
"If you won't tell usthe bet is off, that is all.
But I'm always ready to back myopinion on a matter of fowls, and I have a fiver on it that thebird I ate is country bred."
"Well, then, you've lost your fiver, for it's town bred," snappedthe salesman.
"It's nothing of the kind."
"I say it is."
"I don't believe it."
"D'you think you know more about fowls than I, who have handledthem ever since I was a nipper?
I tell you, all those birds thatwent to the Alpha were town bred."
"You'll never persuade me to believe that."
"Will you bet, then?"
"It's merely taking your money, for I know that I am right.
ButI'll have a sovereign on with you, just to teach you not to beobstinate."
The salesman chuckled grimly.
"Bring me the books, Bill," saidhe.
The small boy brought round a small thin volume and a greatgreasy-backed one, laying them out together beneath the hanginglamp.
"Now then, Mr. Cocksure," said the salesman, "I thought that Iwas out of geese, but before I finish you'll find that there isstill one left in my shop.
You see this little book?"
"Well?"
"That's the list of the folk from whom I buy.
D'you see?
Well,then, here on this page are the country folk, and the numbersafter their names are where their accounts are in the big ledger.
Now, then!
You see this other page in red ink?
Well, that is alist of my town suppliers.
Now, look at that third name.
Justread it out to me."
"Mrs. Oakshott, 117, Brixton Road--249," read Holmes.
"Quite so.
Now turn that up in the ledger."
Holmes turned to the page indicated.
"Here you are, 'Mrs.
Oakshott, 117, Brixton Road, egg and poultry supplier.'"
"Now, then, what's the last entry?"
"'December 22nd.
Twenty-four geese at 7s.
6d.'"
"Quite so.
There you are.
And underneath?"
"'Sold to Mr. Windigate of the Alpha, at 12s.'"
"What have you to say now?"
Sherlock Holmes looked deeply chagrined.
He drew a sovereign fromhis pocket and threw it down upon the slab, turning away with theair of a man whose disgust is too deep for words.
A few yards offhe stopped under a lamp-post and laughed in the hearty, noiselessfashion which was peculiar to him.
"When you see a man with whiskers of that cut and the 'Pink 'un'protruding out of his pocket, you can always draw him by a bet,"said he.
"I daresay that if I had put 100 pounds down in front ofhim, that man would not have given me such complete informationas was drawn from him by the idea that he was doing me on awager.
Well, Watson, we are, I fancy, nearing the end of ourquest, and the only point which remains to be determined iswhether we should go on to this Mrs. Oakshott to-night, orwhether we should reserve it for to-morrow.
It is clear from whatthat surly fellow said that there are others besides ourselveswho are anxious about the matter, and I should--"His remarks were suddenly cut short by a loud hubbub which brokeout from the stall which we had just left.
Turning round we saw alittle rat-faced fellow standing in the centre of the circle ofyellow light which was thrown by the swinging lamp, whileBreckinridge, the salesman, framed in the door of his stall, wasshaking his fists fiercely at the cringing figure.
"I've had enough of you and your geese," he shouted.
"I wish youwere all at the devil together.
If you come pestering me any morewith your silly talk I'll set the dog at you.
You bring Mrs.Oakshott here and I'll answer her, but what have you to do withit?
Did I buy the geese off you?"
"No; but one of them was mine all the same," whined the littleman.
"Well, then, ask Mrs. Oakshott for it."
"She told me to ask you."
"Well, you can ask the King of Proosia, for all I care.
I've hadenough of it.
Get out of this!"
He rushed fiercely forward, andthe inquirer flitted away into the darkness.
"Ha!
this may save us a visit to Brixton Road," whispered Holmes.
"Come with me, and we will see what is to be made of thisfellow."
Striding through the scattered knots of people wholounged round the flaring stalls, my companion speedily overtookthe little man and touched him upon the shoulder.
He spranground, and I could see in the gas-light that every vestige ofcolour had been driven from his face.
"Who are you, then?
What do you want?"
he asked in a quaveringvoice.
"You will excuse me," said Holmes blandly, "but I could not helpoverhearing the questions which you put to the salesman just now.
I think that I could be of assistance to you."
"You?
Who are you?
How could you know anything of the matter?"
"My name is Sherlock Holmes.
It is my business to know what otherpeople don't know."
"But you can know nothing of this?"
"Excuse me, I know everything of it.
You are endeavouring totrace some geese which were sold by Mrs. Oakshott, of BrixtonRoad, to a salesman named Breckinridge, by him in turn to Mr.Windigate, of the Alpha, and by him to his club, of which Mr.Henry Baker is a member."
"Oh, sir, you are the very man whom I have longed to meet," criedthe little fellow with outstretched hands and quivering fingers.
"I can hardly explain to you how interested I am in this matter."
Sherlock Holmes hailed a four-wheeler which was passing.
"In thatcase we had better discuss it in a cosy room rather than in thiswind-swept market-place," said he.
"But pray tell me, before wego farther, who it is that I have the pleasure of assisting."
The man hesitated for an instant.
"My name is John Robinson," heanswered with a sidelong glance.
"No, no; the real name," said Holmes sweetly.
"It is alwaysawkward doing business with an alias."
A flush sprang to the white cheeks of the stranger.
"Well then,"said he, "my real name is James Ryder."
"Precisely so.
Head attendant at the Hotel Cosmopolitan.
Praystep into the cab, and I shall soon be able to tell youeverything which you would wish to know."
The little man stood glancing from one to the other of us withhalf-frightened, half-hopeful eyes, as one who is not surewhether he is on the verge of a windfall or of a catastrophe.
Then he stepped into the cab, and in half an hour we were back inthe sitting-room at Baker Street.
Nothing had been said duringour drive, but the high, thin breathing of our new companion, andthe claspings and unclaspings of his hands, spoke of the nervoustension within him.
"Here we are!"
said Holmes cheerily as we filed into the room.
"The fire looks very seasonable in this weather.
You look cold,Mr. Ryder.
Pray take the basket-chair.
I will just put on myslippers before we settle this little matter of yours.
Now, then!
You want to know what became of those geese?"
"Yes, sir."
"Or rather, I fancy, of that goose.
It was one bird, I imagine inwhich you were interested--white, with a black bar across thetail."
Ryder quivered with emotion.
"Oh, sir," he cried, "can you tellme where it went to?"
"It came here."
"Here?"
"Yes, and a most remarkable bird it proved.
I don't wonder thatyou should take an interest in it.
It laid an egg after it wasdead--the bonniest, brightest little blue egg that ever was seen.
I have it here in my museum."
Our visitor staggered to his feet and clutched the mantelpiecewith his right hand.
Holmes unlocked his strong-box and held upthe blue carbuncle, which shone out like a star, with a cold,brilliant, many-pointed radiance.
Ryder stood glaring with adrawn face, uncertain whether to claim or to disown it.
"The game's up, Ryder," said Holmes quietly.
"Hold up, man, oryou'll be into the fire!
Give him an arm back into his chair,Watson.
He's not got blood enough to go in for felony withimpunity.
Give him a dash of brandy.
So!
Now he looks a littlemore human.
What a shrimp it is, to be sure!"
For a moment he had staggered and nearly fallen, but the brandybrought a tinge of colour into his cheeks, and he sat staringwith frightened eyes at his accuser.
"I have almost every link in my hands, and all the proofs which Icould possibly need, so there is little which you need tell me.
Still, that little may as well be cleared up to make the casecomplete.
You had heard, Ryder, of this blue stone of theCountess of Morcar's?"
"It was Catherine Cusack who told me of it," said he in acrackling voice.
"I see--her ladyship's waiting-maid.
Well, the temptation ofsudden wealth so easily acquired was too much for you, as it hasbeen for better men before you; but you were not very scrupulousin the means you used.
It seems to me, Ryder, that there is themaking of a very pretty villain in you.
You knew that this manHorner, the plumber, had been concerned in some such matterbefore, and that suspicion would rest the more readily upon him.
What did you do, then?
You made some small job in my lady'sroom--you and your confederate Cusack--and you managed that heshould be the man sent for.
Then, when he had left, you rifledthe jewel-case, raised the alarm, and had this unfortunate manarrested.
You then--"Ryder threw himself down suddenly upon the rug and clutched at mycompanion's knees.
"For God's sake, have mercy!"
he shrieked.
"Think of my father!
Of my mother!
It would break their hearts.
Inever went wrong before!
I never will again.
I swear it.
I'llswear it on a Bible.
Oh, don't bring it into court!
For Christ'ssake, don't!"
"Get back into your chair!"
said Holmes sternly.
"It is very wellto cringe and crawl now, but you thought little enough of thispoor Horner in the dock for a crime of which he knew nothing."
"I will fly, Mr. Holmes.
I will leave the country, sir.
Then thecharge against him will break down."
"Hum!
We will talk about that.
And now let us hear a true accountof the next act.
How came the stone into the goose, and how camethe goose into the open market?
Tell us the truth, for there liesyour only hope of safety."
Ryder passed his tongue over his parched lips.
"I will tell youit just as it happened, sir," said he.
"When Horner had beenarrested, it seemed to me that it would be best for me to getaway with the stone at once, for I did not know at what momentthe police might not take it into their heads to search me and myroom.
There was no place about the hotel where it would be safe.
I went out, as if on some commission, and I made for my sister'shouse.
She had married a man named Oakshott, and lived in BrixtonRoad, where she fattened fowls for the market.
All the way thereevery man I met seemed to me to be a policeman or a detective;and, for all that it was a cold night, the sweat was pouring downmy face before I came to the Brixton Road.
My sister asked mewhat was the matter, and why I was so pale; but I told her that Ihad been upset by the jewel robbery at the hotel.
Then I wentinto the back yard and smoked a pipe and wondered what it wouldbe best to do.
"I had a friend once called Maudsley, who went to the bad, andhas just been serving his time in Pentonville.
One day he had metme, and fell into talk about the ways of thieves, and how theycould get rid of what they stole.
I knew that he would be true tome, for I knew one or two things about him; so I made up my mindto go right on to Kilburn, where he lived, and take him into myconfidence.
He would show me how to turn the stone into money.
But how to get to him in safety?
I thought of the agonies I hadgone through in coming from the hotel.
I might at any moment beseized and searched, and there would be the stone in my waistcoatpocket.
I was leaning against the wall at the time and looking atthe geese which were waddling about round my feet, and suddenlyan idea came into my head which showed me how I could beat thebest detective that ever lived.
"My sister had told me some weeks before that I might have thepick of her geese for a Christmas present, and I knew that shewas always as good as her word.
I would take my goose now, and init I would carry my stone to Kilburn.
There was a little shed inthe yard, and behind this I drove one of the birds--a fine bigone, white, with a barred tail.
I caught it, and prying its billopen, I thrust the stone down its throat as far as my fingercould reach.
The bird gave a gulp, and I felt the stone passalong its gullet and down into its crop.
But the creature flappedand struggled, and out came my sister to know what was thematter.
As I turned to speak to her the brute broke loose andfluttered off among the others.
"'Whatever were you doing with that bird, Jem?'
says she.
"'Well,' said I, 'you said you'd give me one for Christmas, and Iwas feeling which was the fattest.'
"'Oh,' says she, 'we've set yours aside for you--Jem's bird, wecall it.
It's the big white one over yonder.
There's twenty-sixof them, which makes one for you, and one for us, and two dozenfor the market.'
"'Thank you, Maggie,' says I; 'but if it is all the same to you,I'd rather have that one I was handling just now.'
"'The other is a good three pound heavier,' said she, 'and wefattened it expressly for you.'
"'Never mind.
I'll have the other, and I'll take it now,' said I.
"'Oh, just as you like,' said she, a little huffed.
'Which is ityou want, then?'
"'That white one with the barred tail, right in the middle of theflock.'
"'Oh, very well.
Kill it and take it with you.'
"Well, I did what she said, Mr. Holmes, and I carried the birdall the way to Kilburn.
I told my pal what I had done, for he wasa man that it was easy to tell a thing like that to.
He laugheduntil he choked, and we got a knife and opened the goose.
Myheart turned to water, for there was no sign of the stone, and Iknew that some terrible mistake had occurred.
I left the bird,rushed back to my sister's, and hurried into the back yard.
Therewas not a bird to be seen there.
"'Where are they all, Maggie?'
I cried.
"'Gone to the dealer's, Jem.'
"'Which dealer's?'
"'Breckinridge, of Covent Garden.'
"'But was there another with a barred tail?'
I asked, 'the sameas the one I chose?'
"'Yes, Jem; there were two barred-tailed ones, and I could nevertell them apart.'
"Well, then, of course I saw it all, and I ran off as hard as myfeet would carry me to this man Breckinridge; but he had sold thelot at once, and not one word would he tell me as to where theyhad gone.
You heard him yourselves to-night.
Well, he has alwaysanswered me like that.
My sister thinks that I am going mad.
Sometimes I think that I am myself.
And now--and now I am myselfa branded thief, without ever having touched the wealth for whichI sold my character.
God help me!
God help me!"
He burst intoconvulsive sobbing, with his face buried in his hands.
There was a long silence, broken only by his heavy breathing andby the measured tapping of Sherlock Holmes' finger-tips upon theedge of the table.
Then my friend rose and threw open the door.
"Get out!"
said he.
"What, sir!
Oh, Heaven bless you!"
"No more words.
Get out!"
And no more words were needed.
There was a rush, a clatter uponthe stairs, the bang of a door, and the crisp rattle of runningfootfalls from the street.
"After all, Watson," said Holmes, reaching up his hand for hisclay pipe, "I am not retained by the police to supply theirdeficiencies.
If Horner were in danger it would be another thing;but this fellow will not appear against him, and the case mustcollapse.
I suppose that I am commuting a felony, but it is justpossible that I am saving a soul.
This fellow will not go wrongagain; he is too terribly frightened.
Send him to gaol now, andyou make him a gaol-bird for life.
Besides, it is the season offorgiveness.
Chance has put in our way a most singular andwhimsical problem, and its solution is its own reward.
If youwill have the goodness to touch the bell, Doctor, we will beginanother investigation, in which, also a bird will be the chieffeature."
VIII.
THE ADVENTURE OF THE SPECKLED BANDOn glancing over my notes of the seventy odd cases in which Ihave during the last eight years studied the methods of my friendSherlock Holmes, I find many tragic, some comic, a large numbermerely strange, but none commonplace; for, working as he didrather for the love of his art than for the acquirement ofwealth, he refused to associate himself with any investigationwhich did not tend towards the unusual, and even the fantastic.
Of all these varied cases, however, I cannot recall any whichpresented more singular features than that which was associatedwith the well-known Surrey family of the Roylotts of Stoke Moran.
The events in question occurred in the early days of myassociation with Holmes, when we were sharing rooms as bachelorsin Baker Street.
It is possible that I might have placed themupon record before, but a promise of secrecy was made at thetime, from which I have only been freed during the last month bythe untimely death of the lady to whom the pledge was given.
Itis perhaps as well that the facts should now come to light, for Ihave reasons to know that there are widespread rumours as to thedeath of Dr. Grimesby Roylott which tend to make the matter evenmore terrible than the truth.
It was early in April in the year '83 that I woke one morning tofind Sherlock Holmes standing, fully dressed, by the side of mybed.
He was a late riser, as a rule, and as the clock on themantelpiece showed me that it was only a quarter-past seven, Iblinked up at him in some surprise, and perhaps just a littleresentment, for I was myself regular in my habits.
"Very sorry to knock you up, Watson," said he, "but it's thecommon lot this morning.
Mrs. Hudson has been knocked up, sheretorted upon me, and I on you."
"What is it, then--a fire?"
"No; a client.
It seems that a young lady has arrived in aconsiderable state of excitement, who insists upon seeing me.
Sheis waiting now in the sitting-room.
Now, when young ladies wanderabout the metropolis at this hour of the morning, and knocksleepy people up out of their beds, I presume that it issomething very pressing which they have to communicate.
Should itprove to be an interesting case, you would, I am sure, wish tofollow it from the outset.
I thought, at any rate, that I shouldcall you and give you the chance."
"My dear fellow, I would not miss it for anything."
I had no keener pleasure than in following Holmes in hisprofessional investigations, and in admiring the rapiddeductions, as swift as intuitions, and yet always founded on alogical basis with which he unravelled the problems which weresubmitted to him.
I rapidly threw on my clothes and was ready ina few minutes to accompany my friend down to the sitting-room.
Alady dressed in black and heavily veiled, who had been sitting inthe window, rose as we entered.
"Good-morning, madam," said Holmes cheerily.
"My name is SherlockHolmes.
This is my intimate friend and associate, Dr. Watson,before whom you can speak as freely as before myself.
Ha!
I amglad to see that Mrs. Hudson has had the good sense to light thefire.
Pray draw up to it, and I shall order you a cup of hotcoffee, for I observe that you are shivering."
"It is not cold which makes me shiver," said the woman in a lowvoice, changing her seat as requested.
"What, then?"
"It is fear, Mr. Holmes.
It is terror."
She raised her veil asshe spoke, and we could see that she was indeed in a pitiablestate of agitation, her face all drawn and grey, with restlessfrightened eyes, like those of some hunted animal.
Her featuresand figure were those of a woman of thirty, but her hair was shotwith premature grey, and her expression was weary and haggard.
Sherlock Holmes ran her over with one of his quick,all-comprehensive glances.
"You must not fear," said he soothingly, bending forward andpatting her forearm.
"We shall soon set matters right, I have nodoubt.
You have come in by train this morning, I see."
"You know me, then?"
"No, but I observe the second half of a return ticket in the palmof your left glove.
You must have started early, and yet you hada good drive in a dog-cart, along heavy roads, before you reachedthe station."
The lady gave a violent start and stared in bewilderment at mycompanion.
"There is no mystery, my dear madam," said he, smiling.
"The leftarm of your jacket is spattered with mud in no less than sevenplaces.
The marks are perfectly fresh.
There is no vehicle save adog-cart which throws up mud in that way, and then only when yousit on the left-hand side of the driver."
"Whatever your reasons may be, you are perfectly correct," saidshe.
"I started from home before six, reached Leatherhead attwenty past, and came in by the first train to Waterloo.
Sir, Ican stand this strain no longer; I shall go mad if it continues.
I have no one to turn to--none, save only one, who cares for me,and he, poor fellow, can be of little aid.
I have heard of you,Mr. Holmes; I have heard of you from Mrs. Farintosh, whom youhelped in the hour of her sore need.
It was from her that I hadyour address.
Oh, sir, do you not think that you could help me,too, and at least throw a little light through the dense darknesswhich surrounds me?
At present it is out of my power to rewardyou for your services, but in a month or six weeks I shall bemarried, with the control of my own income, and then at least youshall not find me ungrateful."
Holmes turned to his desk and, unlocking it, drew out a smallcase-book, which he consulted.
"Farintosh," said he.
"Ah yes, I recall the case; it wasconcerned with an opal tiara.
I think it was before your time,Watson.
I can only say, madam, that I shall be happy to devotethe same care to your case as I did to that of your friend.
As toreward, my profession is its own reward; but you are at libertyto defray whatever expenses I may be put to, at the time whichsuits you best.
And now I beg that you will lay before useverything that may help us in forming an opinion upon thematter."
"Alas!"
replied our visitor, "the very horror of my situationlies in the fact that my fears are so vague, and my suspicionsdepend so entirely upon small points, which might seem trivial toanother, that even he to whom of all others I have a right tolook for help and advice looks upon all that I tell him about itas the fancies of a nervous woman.
He does not say so, but I canread it from his soothing answers and averted eyes.
But I haveheard, Mr. Holmes, that you can see deeply into the manifoldwickedness of the human heart.
You may advise me how to walk amidthe dangers which encompass me."
"I am all attention, madam."
"My name is Helen Stoner, and I am living with my stepfather, whois the last survivor of one of the oldest Saxon families inEngland, the Roylotts of Stoke Moran, on the western border ofSurrey."
Holmes nodded his head.
"The name is familiar to me," said he.
"The family was at one time among the richest in England, and theestates extended over the borders into Berkshire in the north,and Hampshire in the west.
In the last century, however, foursuccessive heirs were of a dissolute and wasteful disposition,and the family ruin was eventually completed by a gambler in thedays of the Regency.
Nothing was left save a few acres of ground,and the two-hundred-year-old house, which is itself crushed undera heavy mortgage.
The last squire dragged out his existencethere, living the horrible life of an aristocratic pauper; buthis only son, my stepfather, seeing that he must adapt himself tothe new conditions, obtained an advance from a relative, whichenabled him to take a medical degree and went out to Calcutta,where, by his professional skill and his force of character, heestablished a large practice.
In a fit of anger, however, causedby some robberies which had been perpetrated in the house, hebeat his native butler to death and narrowly escaped a capitalsentence.
As it was, he suffered a long term of imprisonment andafterwards returned to England a morose and disappointed man.
"When Dr. Roylott was in India he married my mother, Mrs. Stoner,the young widow of Major-General Stoner, of the Bengal Artillery.
My sister Julia and I were twins, and we were only two years oldat the time of my mother's re-marriage.
She had a considerablesum of money--not less than 1000 pounds a year--and this shebequeathed to Dr. Roylott entirely while we resided with him,with a provision that a certain annual sum should be allowed toeach of us in the event of our marriage.
Shortly after our returnto England my mother died--she was killed eight years ago in arailway accident near Crewe.
Dr. Roylott then abandoned hisattempts to establish himself in practice in London and took usto live with him in the old ancestral house at Stoke Moran.
Themoney which my mother had left was enough for all our wants, andthere seemed to be no obstacle to our happiness.
"But a terrible change came over our stepfather about this time.
Instead of making friends and exchanging visits with ourneighbours, who had at first been overjoyed to see a Roylott ofStoke Moran back in the old family seat, he shut himself up inhis house and seldom came out save to indulge in ferociousquarrels with whoever might cross his path.
Violence of temperapproaching to mania has been hereditary in the men of thefamily, and in my stepfather's case it had, I believe, beenintensified by his long residence in the tropics.
A series ofdisgraceful brawls took place, two of which ended in thepolice-court, until at last he became the terror of the village,and the folks would fly at his approach, for he is a man ofimmense strength, and absolutely uncontrollable in his anger.
"Last week he hurled the local blacksmith over a parapet into astream, and it was only by paying over all the money which Icould gather together that I was able to avert another publicexposure.
He had no friends at all save the wandering gipsies,and he would give these vagabonds leave to encamp upon the fewacres of bramble-covered land which represent the family estate,and would accept in return the hospitality of their tents,wandering away with them sometimes for weeks on end.
He has apassion also for Indian animals, which are sent over to him by acorrespondent, and he has at this moment a cheetah and a baboon,which wander freely over his grounds and are feared by thevillagers almost as much as their master.
"You can imagine from what I say that my poor sister Julia and Ihad no great pleasure in our lives.
No servant would stay withus, and for a long time we did all the work of the house.
She wasbut thirty at the time of her death, and yet her hair had alreadybegun to whiten, even as mine has."
"Your sister is dead, then?"
"She died just two years ago, and it is of her death that I wishto speak to you.
You can understand that, living the life which Ihave described, we were little likely to see anyone of our ownage and position.
We had, however, an aunt, my mother's maidensister, Miss Honoria Westphail, who lives near Harrow, and wewere occasionally allowed to pay short visits at this lady'shouse.
Julia went there at Christmas two years ago, and met therea half-pay major of marines, to whom she became engaged.
Mystepfather learned of the engagement when my sister returned andoffered no objection to the marriage; but within a fortnight ofthe day which had been fixed for the wedding, the terrible eventoccurred which has deprived me of my only companion."
Sherlock Holmes had been leaning back in his chair with his eyesclosed and his head sunk in a cushion, but he half opened hislids now and glanced across at his visitor.
"Pray be precise as to details," said he.
"It is easy for me to be so, for every event of that dreadfultime is seared into my memory.
The manor-house is, as I havealready said, very old, and only one wing is now inhabited.
Thebedrooms in this wing are on the ground floor, the sitting-roomsbeing in the central block of the buildings.
Of these bedroomsthe first is Dr. Roylott's, the second my sister's, and the thirdmy own.
There is no communication between them, but they all openout into the same corridor.
Do I make myself plain?"
"Perfectly so."
"The windows of the three rooms open out upon the lawn.
Thatfatal night Dr. Roylott had gone to his room early, though weknew that he had not retired to rest, for my sister was troubledby the smell of the strong Indian cigars which it was his customto smoke.
She left her room, therefore, and came into mine, whereshe sat for some time, chatting about her approaching wedding.
Ateleven o'clock she rose to leave me, but she paused at the doorand looked back.
"'Tell me, Helen,' said she, 'have you ever heard anyone whistlein the dead of the night?'
"'Never,' said I.
"'I suppose that you could not possibly whistle, yourself, inyour sleep?'
"'Certainly not.
But why?'
"'Because during the last few nights I have always, about threein the morning, heard a low, clear whistle.
I am a light sleeper,and it has awakened me.
I cannot tell where it came from--perhapsfrom the next room, perhaps from the lawn.
I thought that I wouldjust ask you whether you had heard it.'
"'No, I have not.
It must be those wretched gipsies in theplantation.'
"'Very likely.
And yet if it were on the lawn, I wonder that youdid not hear it also.'
"'Ah, but I sleep more heavily than you.'
"'Well, it is of no great consequence, at any rate.'
She smiledback at me, closed my door, and a few moments later I heard herkey turn in the lock."
"Indeed," said Holmes.
"Was it your custom always to lockyourselves in at night?"
"Always."
"And why?"
"I think that I mentioned to you that the doctor kept a cheetahand a baboon.
We had no feeling of security unless our doors werelocked."
"Quite so.
Pray proceed with your statement."
"I could not sleep that night.
A vague feeling of impendingmisfortune impressed me.
My sister and I, you will recollect,were twins, and you know how subtle are the links which bind twosouls which are so closely allied.
It was a wild night.
The windwas howling outside, and the rain was beating and splashingagainst the windows.
Suddenly, amid all the hubbub of the gale,there burst forth the wild scream of a terrified woman.
I knewthat it was my sister's voice.
I sprang from my bed, wrapped ashawl round me, and rushed into the corridor.
As I opened my doorI seemed to hear a low whistle, such as my sister described, anda few moments later a clanging sound, as if a mass of metal hadfallen.
As I ran down the passage, my sister's door was unlocked,and revolved slowly upon its hinges.
I stared at ithorror-stricken, not knowing what was about to issue from it.
Bythe light of the corridor-lamp I saw my sister appear at theopening, her face blanched with terror, her hands groping forhelp, her whole figure swaying to and fro like that of adrunkard.
I ran to her and threw my arms round her, but at thatmoment her knees seemed to give way and she fell to the ground.
She writhed as one who is in terrible pain, and her limbs weredreadfully convulsed.
At first I thought that she had notrecognised me, but as I bent over her she suddenly shrieked outin a voice which I shall never forget, 'Oh, my God!
Helen!
It wasthe band!
The speckled band!'
There was something else which shewould fain have said, and she stabbed with her finger into theair in the direction of the doctor's room, but a fresh convulsionseized her and choked her words.
I rushed out, calling loudly formy stepfather, and I met him hastening from his room in hisdressing-gown.
When he reached my sister's side she wasunconscious, and though he poured brandy down her throat and sentfor medical aid from the village, all efforts were in vain, forshe slowly sank and died without having recovered herconsciousness.
Such was the dreadful end of my beloved sister."
"One moment," said Holmes, "are you sure about this whistle andmetallic sound?
Could you swear to it?"
"That was what the county coroner asked me at the inquiry.
It ismy strong impression that I heard it, and yet, among the crash ofthe gale and the creaking of an old house, I may possibly havebeen deceived."
"Was your sister dressed?"
"No, she was in her night-dress.
In her right hand was found thecharred stump of a match, and in her left a match-box."
"Showing that she had struck a light and looked about her whenthe alarm took place.
That is important.
And what conclusions didthe coroner come to?"
"He investigated the case with great care, for Dr. Roylott'sconduct had long been notorious in the county, but he was unableto find any satisfactory cause of death.
My evidence showed thatthe door had been fastened upon the inner side, and the windowswere blocked by old-fashioned shutters with broad iron bars,which were secured every night.
The walls were carefully sounded,and were shown to be quite solid all round, and the flooring wasalso thoroughly examined, with the same result.
The chimney iswide, but is barred up by four large staples.
It is certain,therefore, that my sister was quite alone when she met her end.
Besides, there were no marks of any violence upon her."
"How about poison?"
"The doctors examined her for it, but without success."
"What do you think that this unfortunate lady died of, then?"
"It is my belief that she died of pure fear and nervous shock,though what it was that frightened her I cannot imagine."
"Were there gipsies in the plantation at the time?"
"Yes, there are nearly always some there."
"Ah, and what did you gather from this allusion to a band--aspeckled band?"
"Sometimes I have thought that it was merely the wild talk ofdelirium, sometimes that it may have referred to some band ofpeople, perhaps to these very gipsies in the plantation.
I do notknow whether the spotted handkerchiefs which so many of them wearover their heads might have suggested the strange adjective whichshe used."
Holmes shook his head like a man who is far from being satisfied.
"These are very deep waters," said he; "pray go on with yournarrative."
"Two years have passed since then, and my life has been untillately lonelier than ever.
A month ago, however, a dear friend,whom I have known for many years, has done me the honour to askmy hand in marriage.
His name is Armitage--Percy Armitage--thesecond son of Mr. Armitage, of Crane Water, near Reading.
Mystepfather has offered no opposition to the match, and we are tobe married in the course of the spring.
Two days ago some repairswere started in the west wing of the building, and my bedroomwall has been pierced, so that I have had to move into thechamber in which my sister died, and to sleep in the very bed inwhich she slept.
Imagine, then, my thrill of terror when lastnight, as I lay awake, thinking over her terrible fate, Isuddenly heard in the silence of the night the low whistle whichhad been the herald of her own death.
I sprang up and lit thelamp, but nothing was to be seen in the room.
I was too shaken togo to bed again, however, so I dressed, and as soon as it wasdaylight I slipped down, got a dog-cart at the Crown Inn, whichis opposite, and drove to Leatherhead, from whence I have come onthis morning with the one object of seeing you and asking youradvice."
"You have done wisely," said my friend.
"But have you told meall?"
"Yes, all."
"Miss Roylott, you have not.
You are screening your stepfather."
"Why, what do you mean?"
For answer Holmes pushed back the frill of black lace whichfringed the hand that lay upon our visitor's knee.
Five littlelivid spots, the marks of four fingers and a thumb, were printedupon the white wrist.
"You have been cruelly used," said Holmes.
The lady coloured deeply and covered over her injured wrist.
"Heis a hard man," she said, "and perhaps he hardly knows his ownstrength."
There was a long silence, during which Holmes leaned his chinupon his hands and stared into the crackling fire.
"This is a very deep business," he said at last.
"There are athousand details which I should desire to know before I decideupon our course of action.
Yet we have not a moment to lose.
Ifwe were to come to Stoke Moran to-day, would it be possible forus to see over these rooms without the knowledge of yourstepfather?"
"As it happens, he spoke of coming into town to-day upon somemost important business.
It is probable that he will be away allday, and that there would be nothing to disturb you.
We have ahousekeeper now, but she is old and foolish, and I could easilyget her out of the way."
"Excellent.
You are not averse to this trip, Watson?"
"By no means."
"Then we shall both come.
What are you going to do yourself?"
"I have one or two things which I would wish to do now that I amin town.
But I shall return by the twelve o'clock train, so as tobe there in time for your coming."
"And you may expect us early in the afternoon.
I have myself somesmall business matters to attend to.
Will you not wait andbreakfast?"
"No, I must go.
My heart is lightened already since I haveconfided my trouble to you.
I shall look forward to seeing youagain this afternoon."
She dropped her thick black veil over herface and glided from the room.
"And what do you think of it all, Watson?"
asked Sherlock Holmes,leaning back in his chair.
"It seems to me to be a most dark and sinister business."
"Dark enough and sinister enough."
"Yet if the lady is correct in saying that the flooring and wallsare sound, and that the door, window, and chimney are impassable,then her sister must have been undoubtedly alone when she met hermysterious end."
"What becomes, then, of these nocturnal whistles, and what of thevery peculiar words of the dying woman?"
"I cannot think."
"When you combine the ideas of whistles at night, the presence ofa band of gipsies who are on intimate terms with this old doctor,the fact that we have every reason to believe that the doctor hasan interest in preventing his stepdaughter's marriage, the dyingallusion to a band, and, finally, the fact that Miss Helen Stonerheard a metallic clang, which might have been caused by one ofthose metal bars that secured the shutters falling back into itsplace, I think that there is good ground to think that themystery may be cleared along those lines."
"But what, then, did the gipsies do?"
"I cannot imagine."
"I see many objections to any such theory."
"And so do I.
It is precisely for that reason that we are goingto Stoke Moran this day.
I want to see whether the objections arefatal, or if they may be explained away.
But what in the name ofthe devil!"
The ejaculation had been drawn from my companion by the fact thatour door had been suddenly dashed open, and that a huge man hadframed himself in the aperture.
His costume was a peculiarmixture of the professional and of the agricultural, having ablack top-hat, a long frock-coat, and a pair of high gaiters,with a hunting-crop swinging in his hand.
So tall was he that hishat actually brushed the cross bar of the doorway, and hisbreadth seemed to span it across from side to side.
A large face,seared with a thousand wrinkles, burned yellow with the sun, andmarked with every evil passion, was turned from one to the otherof us, while his deep-set, bile-shot eyes, and his high, thin,fleshless nose, gave him somewhat the resemblance to a fierce oldbird of prey.
"Which of you is Holmes?"
asked this apparition.
"My name, sir; but you have the advantage of me," said mycompanion quietly.
"I am Dr. Grimesby Roylott, of Stoke Moran."
"Indeed, Doctor," said Holmes blandly.
"Pray take a seat."
"I will do nothing of the kind.
My stepdaughter has been here.
Ihave traced her.
What has she been saying to you?"
"It is a little cold for the time of the year," said Holmes.
"What has she been saying to you?"
screamed the old manfuriously.
"But I have heard that the crocuses promise well," continued mycompanion imperturbably.
"Ha!
You put me off, do you?"
said our new visitor, taking a stepforward and shaking his hunting-crop.
"I know you, you scoundrel!
I have heard of you before.
You are Holmes, the meddler."
My friend smiled.
"Holmes, the busybody!"
His smile broadened.
"Holmes, the Scotland Yard Jack-in-office!"
Holmes chuckled heartily.
"Your conversation is mostentertaining," said he.
"When you go out close the door, forthere is a decided draught."
"I will go when I have said my say.
Don't you dare to meddle withmy affairs.
I know that Miss Stoner has been here.
I traced her!
I am a dangerous man to fall foul of!
See here."
He steppedswiftly forward, seized the poker, and bent it into a curve withhis huge brown hands.
"See that you keep yourself out of my grip," he snarled, andhurling the twisted poker into the fireplace he strode out of theroom.
"He seems a very amiable person," said Holmes, laughing.
"I amnot quite so bulky, but if he had remained I might have shown himthat my grip was not much more feeble than his own."
As he spokehe picked up the steel poker and, with a sudden effort,straightened it out again.
"Fancy his having the insolence to confound me with the officialdetective force!
This incident gives zest to our investigation,however, and I only trust that our little friend will not sufferfrom her imprudence in allowing this brute to trace her.
And now,Watson, we shall order breakfast, and afterwards I shall walkdown to Doctors' Commons, where I hope to get some data which mayhelp us in this matter."
It was nearly one o'clock when Sherlock Holmes returned from hisexcursion.
He held in his hand a sheet of blue paper, scrawledover with notes and figures.
"I have seen the will of the deceased wife," said he.
"Todetermine its exact meaning I have been obliged to work out thepresent prices of the investments with which it is concerned.
Thetotal income, which at the time of the wife's death was littleshort of 1100 pounds, is now, through the fall in agriculturalprices, not more than 750 pounds.
Each daughter can claim anincome of 250 pounds, in case of marriage.
It is evident,therefore, that if both girls had married, this beauty would havehad a mere pittance, while even one of them would cripple him toa very serious extent.
My morning's work has not been wasted,since it has proved that he has the very strongest motives forstanding in the way of anything of the sort.
And now, Watson,this is too serious for dawdling, especially as the old man isaware that we are interesting ourselves in his affairs; so if youare ready, we shall call a cab and drive to Waterloo.
I should bevery much obliged if you would slip your revolver into yourpocket.
An Eley's No.
2 is an excellent argument with gentlemenwho can twist steel pokers into knots.
That and a tooth-brushare, I think, all that we need."
At Waterloo we were fortunate in catching a train forLeatherhead, where we hired a trap at the station inn and drovefor four or five miles through the lovely Surrey lanes.
It was aperfect day, with a bright sun and a few fleecy clouds in theheavens.
The trees and wayside hedges were just throwing outtheir first green shoots, and the air was full of the pleasantsmell of the moist earth.
To me at least there was a strangecontrast between the sweet promise of the spring and thissinister quest upon which we were engaged.
My companion sat inthe front of the trap, his arms folded, his hat pulled down overhis eyes, and his chin sunk upon his breast, buried in thedeepest thought.
Suddenly, however, he started, tapped me on theshoulder, and pointed over the meadows.
"Look there!"
said he.
A heavily timbered park stretched up in a gentle slope,thickening into a grove at the highest point.
From amid thebranches there jutted out the grey gables and high roof-tree of avery old mansion.
"Stoke Moran?"
said he.
"Yes, sir, that be the house of Dr. Grimesby Roylott," remarkedthe driver.
"There is some building going on there," said Holmes; "that iswhere we are going."
"There's the village," said the driver, pointing to a cluster ofroofs some distance to the left; "but if you want to get to thehouse, you'll find it shorter to get over this stile, and so bythe foot-path over the fields.
There it is, where the lady iswalking."
"And the lady, I fancy, is Miss Stoner," observed Holmes, shadinghis eyes.
"Yes, I think we had better do as you suggest."
We got off, paid our fare, and the trap rattled back on its wayto Leatherhead.
"I thought it as well," said Holmes as we climbed the stile,"that this fellow should think we had come here as architects, oron some definite business.
It may stop his gossip.
Good-afternoon, Miss Stoner.
You see that we have been as good asour word."
Our client of the morning had hurried forward to meet us with aface which spoke her joy.
"I have been waiting so eagerly foryou," she cried, shaking hands with us warmly.
"All has turnedout splendidly.
Dr. Roylott has gone to town, and it is unlikelythat he will be back before evening."
"We have had the pleasure of making the doctor's acquaintance,"said Holmes, and in a few words he sketched out what hadoccurred.
Miss Stoner turned white to the lips as she listened.
"Good heavens!"
she cried, "he has followed me, then."
"So it appears."
"He is so cunning that I never know when I am safe from him.
Whatwill he say when he returns?"
"He must guard himself, for he may find that there is someonemore cunning than himself upon his track.
You must lock yourselfup from him to-night.
If he is violent, we shall take you away toyour aunt's at Harrow.
Now, we must make the best use of ourtime, so kindly take us at once to the rooms which we are toexamine."
The building was of grey, lichen-blotched stone, with a highcentral portion and two curving wings, like the claws of a crab,thrown out on each side.
In one of these wings the windows werebroken and blocked with wooden boards, while the roof was partlycaved in, a picture of ruin.
The central portion was in littlebetter repair, but the right-hand block was comparatively modern,and the blinds in the windows, with the blue smoke curling upfrom the chimneys, showed that this was where the family resided.
Some scaffolding had been erected against the end wall, and thestone-work had been broken into, but there were no signs of anyworkmen at the moment of our visit.
Holmes walked slowly up anddown the ill-trimmed lawn and examined with deep attention theoutsides of the windows.
"This, I take it, belongs to the room in which you used to sleep,the centre one to your sister's, and the one next to the mainbuilding to Dr. Roylott's chamber?"
"Exactly so.
But I am now sleeping in the middle one."
"Pending the alterations, as I understand.
By the way, there doesnot seem to be any very pressing need for repairs at that endwall."
"There were none.
I believe that it was an excuse to move me frommy room."
"Ah!
that is suggestive.
Now, on the other side of this narrowwing runs the corridor from which these three rooms open.
Thereare windows in it, of course?"
"Yes, but very small ones.
Too narrow for anyone to passthrough."
"As you both locked your doors at night, your rooms wereunapproachable from that side.
Now, would you have the kindnessto go into your room and bar your shutters?"
Miss Stoner did so, and Holmes, after a careful examinationthrough the open window, endeavoured in every way to force theshutter open, but without success.
There was no slit throughwhich a knife could be passed to raise the bar.
Then with hislens he tested the hinges, but they were of solid iron, builtfirmly into the massive masonry.
"Hum!"
said he, scratching hischin in some perplexity, "my theory certainly presents somedifficulties.
No one could pass these shutters if they werebolted.
Well, we shall see if the inside throws any light uponthe matter."
A small side door led into the whitewashed corridor from whichthe three bedrooms opened.
Holmes refused to examine the thirdchamber, so we passed at once to the second, that in which MissStoner was now sleeping, and in which her sister had met with herfate.
It was a homely little room, with a low ceiling and agaping fireplace, after the fashion of old country-houses.
Abrown chest of drawers stood in one corner, a narrowwhite-counterpaned bed in another, and a dressing-table on theleft-hand side of the window.
These articles, with two smallwicker-work chairs, made up all the furniture in the room savefor a square of Wilton carpet in the centre.
The boards round andthe panelling of the walls were of brown, worm-eaten oak, so oldand discoloured that it may have dated from the original buildingof the house.
Holmes drew one of the chairs into a corner and satsilent, while his eyes travelled round and round and up and down,taking in every detail of the apartment.
"Where does that bell communicate with?"
he asked at lastpointing to a thick bell-rope which hung down beside the bed, thetassel actually lying upon the pillow.
"It goes to the housekeeper's room."
"It looks newer than the other things?"
"Yes, it was only put there a couple of years ago."
"Your sister asked for it, I suppose?"
"No, I never heard of her using it.
We used always to get what wewanted for ourselves."
"Indeed, it seemed unnecessary to put so nice a bell-pull there.
You will excuse me for a few minutes while I satisfy myself as tothis floor."
He threw himself down upon his face with his lens inhis hand and crawled swiftly backward and forward, examiningminutely the cracks between the boards.
Then he did the same withthe wood-work with which the chamber was panelled.
Finally hewalked over to the bed and spent some time in staring at it andin running his eye up and down the wall.
Finally he took thebell-rope in his hand and gave it a brisk tug.
"Why, it's a dummy," said he.
"Won't it ring?"
"No, it is not even attached to a wire.
This is very interesting.
You can see now that it is fastened to a hook just above wherethe little opening for the ventilator is."
"How very absurd!
I never noticed that before."
"Very strange!"
muttered Holmes, pulling at the rope.
"There areone or two very singular points about this room.
For example,what a fool a builder must be to open a ventilator into anotherroom, when, with the same trouble, he might have communicatedwith the outside air!"
"That is also quite modern," said the lady.
"Done about the same time as the bell-rope?"
remarked Holmes.
"Yes, there were several little changes carried out about thattime."
"They seem to have been of a most interesting character--dummybell-ropes, and ventilators which do not ventilate.
With yourpermission, Miss Stoner, we shall now carry our researches intothe inner apartment."
Dr. Grimesby Roylott's chamber was larger than that of hisstep-daughter, but was as plainly furnished.
A camp-bed, a smallwooden shelf full of books, mostly of a technical character, anarmchair beside the bed, a plain wooden chair against the wall, around table, and a large iron safe were the principal thingswhich met the eye.
Holmes walked slowly round and examined eachand all of them with the keenest interest.
"What's in here?"
he asked, tapping the safe.
"My stepfather's business papers."
"Oh!
you have seen inside, then?"
"Only once, some years ago.
I remember that it was full ofpapers."
"There isn't a cat in it, for example?"
"No.
What a strange idea!"
"Well, look at this!"
He took up a small saucer of milk whichstood on the top of it.
"No; we don't keep a cat.
But there is a cheetah and a baboon."
"Ah, yes, of course!
Well, a cheetah is just a big cat, and yet asaucer of milk does not go very far in satisfying its wants, Idaresay.
There is one point which I should wish to determine."
Hesquatted down in front of the wooden chair and examined the seatof it with the greatest attention.
"Thank you.
That is quite settled," said he, rising and puttinghis lens in his pocket.
"Hullo!
Here is something interesting!"
The object which had caught his eye was a small dog lash hung onone corner of the bed.
The lash, however, was curled upon itselfand tied so as to make a loop of whipcord.
"What do you make of that, Watson?"
"It's a common enough lash.
But I don't know why it should betied."
"That is not quite so common, is it?
Ah, me!
it's a wicked world,and when a clever man turns his brains to crime it is the worstof all.
I think that I have seen enough now, Miss Stoner, andwith your permission we shall walk out upon the lawn."
I had never seen my friend's face so grim or his brow so dark asit was when we turned from the scene of this investigation.
Wehad walked several times up and down the lawn, neither MissStoner nor myself liking to break in upon his thoughts before heroused himself from his reverie.
"It is very essential, Miss Stoner," said he, "that you shouldabsolutely follow my advice in every respect."
"I shall most certainly do so."
"The matter is too serious for any hesitation.
Your life maydepend upon your compliance."
"I assure you that I am in your hands."
"In the first place, both my friend and I must spend the night inyour room."
Both Miss Stoner and I gazed at him in astonishment.
"Yes, it must be so.
Let me explain.
I believe that that is thevillage inn over there?"
"Yes, that is the Crown."
"Very good.
Your windows would be visible from there?"
"Certainly."
"You must confine yourself to your room, on pretence of aheadache, when your stepfather comes back.
Then when you hear himretire for the night, you must open the shutters of your window,undo the hasp, put your lamp there as a signal to us, and thenwithdraw quietly with everything which you are likely to wantinto the room which you used to occupy.
I have no doubt that, inspite of the repairs, you could manage there for one night."
"Oh, yes, easily."
"The rest you will leave in our hands."
"But what will you do?"
"We shall spend the night in your room, and we shall investigatethe cause of this noise which has disturbed you."
"I believe, Mr. Holmes, that you have already made up your mind,"said Miss Stoner, laying her hand upon my companion's sleeve.
"Perhaps I have."
"Then, for pity's sake, tell me what was the cause of my sister'sdeath."
"I should prefer to have clearer proofs before I speak."
"You can at least tell me whether my own thought is correct, andif she died from some sudden fright."
"No, I do not think so.
I think that there was probably some moretangible cause.
And now, Miss Stoner, we must leave you for ifDr. Roylott returned and saw us our journey would be in vain.
Good-bye, and be brave, for if you will do what I have told you,you may rest assured that we shall soon drive away the dangersthat threaten you."
Sherlock Holmes and I had no difficulty in engaging a bedroom andsitting-room at the Crown Inn.
They were on the upper floor, andfrom our window we could command a view of the avenue gate, andof the inhabited wing of Stoke Moran Manor House.
At dusk we sawDr. Grimesby Roylott drive past, his huge form looming up besidethe little figure of the lad who drove him.
The boy had someslight difficulty in undoing the heavy iron gates, and we heardthe hoarse roar of the doctor's voice and saw the fury with whichhe shook his clinched fists at him.
The trap drove on, and a fewminutes later we saw a sudden light spring up among the trees asthe lamp was lit in one of the sitting-rooms.
"Do you know, Watson," said Holmes as we sat together in thegathering darkness, "I have really some scruples as to taking youto-night.
There is a distinct element of danger."
"Can I be of assistance?"
"Your presence might be invaluable."
"Then I shall certainly come."
"It is very kind of you."
"You speak of danger.
You have evidently seen more in these roomsthan was visible to me."
"No, but I fancy that I may have deduced a little more.
I imaginethat you saw all that I did."
"I saw nothing remarkable save the bell-rope, and what purposethat could answer I confess is more than I can imagine."
"You saw the ventilator, too?"
"Yes, but I do not think that it is such a very unusual thing tohave a small opening between two rooms.
It was so small that arat could hardly pass through."
"I knew that we should find a ventilator before ever we came toStoke Moran."
"My dear Holmes!"
"Oh, yes, I did.
You remember in her statement she said that hersister could smell Dr. Roylott's cigar.
Now, of course thatsuggested at once that there must be a communication between thetwo rooms.
It could only be a small one, or it would have beenremarked upon at the coroner's inquiry.
I deduced a ventilator."
"But what harm can there be in that?"
"Well, there is at least a curious coincidence of dates.
Aventilator is made, a cord is hung, and a lady who sleeps in thebed dies.
Does not that strike you?"
"I cannot as yet see any connection."
"Did you observe anything very peculiar about that bed?"
"No."
"It was clamped to the floor.
Did you ever see a bed fastenedlike that before?"
"I cannot say that I have."
"The lady could not move her bed.
It must always be in the samerelative position to the ventilator and to the rope--or so we maycall it, since it was clearly never meant for a bell-pull."
"Holmes," I cried, "I seem to see dimly what you are hinting at.
We are only just in time to prevent some subtle and horriblecrime."
"Subtle enough and horrible enough.
When a doctor does go wronghe is the first of criminals.
He has nerve and he has knowledge.
Palmer and Pritchard were among the heads of their profession.
This man strikes even deeper, but I think, Watson, that we shallbe able to strike deeper still.
But we shall have horrors enoughbefore the night is over; for goodness' sake let us have a quietpipe and turn our minds for a few hours to something morecheerful."
About nine o'clock the light among the trees was extinguished,and all was dark in the direction of the Manor House.
Two hourspassed slowly away, and then, suddenly, just at the stroke ofeleven, a single bright light shone out right in front of us.
"That is our signal," said Holmes, springing to his feet; "itcomes from the middle window."
As we passed out he exchanged a few words with the landlord,explaining that we were going on a late visit to an acquaintance,and that it was possible that we might spend the night there.
Amoment later we were out on the dark road, a chill wind blowingin our faces, and one yellow light twinkling in front of usthrough the gloom to guide us on our sombre errand.
There was little difficulty in entering the grounds, forunrepaired breaches gaped in the old park wall.
Making our wayamong the trees, we reached the lawn, crossed it, and were aboutto enter through the window when out from a clump of laurelbushes there darted what seemed to be a hideous and distortedchild, who threw itself upon the grass with writhing limbs andthen ran swiftly across the lawn into the darkness.
"My God!"
I whispered; "did you see it?"
Holmes was for the moment as startled as I.
His hand closed likea vice upon my wrist in his agitation.
Then he broke into a lowlaugh and put his lips to my ear.
"It is a nice household," he murmured.
"That is the baboon."
I had forgotten the strange pets which the doctor affected.
Therewas a cheetah, too; perhaps we might find it upon our shouldersat any moment.
I confess that I felt easier in my mind when,after following Holmes' example and slipping off my shoes, Ifound myself inside the bedroom.
My companion noiselessly closedthe shutters, moved the lamp onto the table, and cast his eyesround the room.
All was as we had seen it in the daytime.
Thencreeping up to me and making a trumpet of his hand, he whisperedinto my ear again so gently that it was all that I could do todistinguish the words:"The least sound would be fatal to our plans."
I nodded to show that I had heard.
"We must sit without light.
He would see it through theventilator."
I nodded again.
"Do not go asleep; your very life may depend upon it.
Have yourpistol ready in case we should need it.
I will sit on the side ofthe bed, and you in that chair."
I took out my revolver and laid it on the corner of the table.
Holmes had brought up a long thin cane, and this he placed uponthe bed beside him.
By it he laid the box of matches and thestump of a candle.
Then he turned down the lamp, and we were leftin darkness.
How shall I ever forget that dreadful vigil?
I could not hear asound, not even the drawing of a breath, and yet I knew that mycompanion sat open-eyed, within a few feet of me, in the samestate of nervous tension in which I was myself.
The shutters cutoff the least ray of light, and we waited in absolute darkness.
From outside came the occasional cry of a night-bird, and once atour very window a long drawn catlike whine, which told us thatthe cheetah was indeed at liberty.
Far away we could hear thedeep tones of the parish clock, which boomed out every quarter ofan hour.
How long they seemed, those quarters!
Twelve struck, andone and two and three, and still we sat waiting silently forwhatever might befall.
Suddenly there was the momentary gleam of a light up in thedirection of the ventilator, which vanished immediately, but wassucceeded by a strong smell of burning oil and heated metal.
Someone in the next room had lit a dark-lantern.
I heard a gentlesound of movement, and then all was silent once more, though thesmell grew stronger.
For half an hour I sat with straining ears.
Then suddenly another sound became audible--a very gentle,soothing sound, like that of a small jet of steam escapingcontinually from a kettle.
The instant that we heard it, Holmessprang from the bed, struck a match, and lashed furiously withhis cane at the bell-pull.
"You see it, Watson?"
he yelled.
"You see it?"
But I saw nothing.
At the moment when Holmes struck the light Iheard a low, clear whistle, but the sudden glare flashing into myweary eyes made it impossible for me to tell what it was at whichmy friend lashed so savagely.
I could, however, see that his facewas deadly pale and filled with horror and loathing.
He hadceased to strike and was gazing up at the ventilator whensuddenly there broke from the silence of the night the mosthorrible cry to which I have ever listened.
It swelled up louderand louder, a hoarse yell of pain and fear and anger all mingledin the one dreadful shriek.
They say that away down in thevillage, and even in the distant parsonage, that cry raised thesleepers from their beds.
It struck cold to our hearts, and Istood gazing at Holmes, and he at me, until the last echoes of ithad died away into the silence from which it rose.
"What can it mean?"
I gasped.
"It means that it is all over," Holmes answered.
"And perhaps,after all, it is for the best.
Take your pistol, and we willenter Dr. Roylott's room."
With a grave face he lit the lamp and led the way down thecorridor.
Twice he struck at the chamber door without any replyfrom within.
Then he turned the handle and entered, I at hisheels, with the cocked pistol in my hand.
It was a singular sight which met our eyes.
On the table stood adark-lantern with the shutter half open, throwing a brilliantbeam of light upon the iron safe, the door of which was ajar.
Beside this table, on the wooden chair, sat Dr. Grimesby Roylottclad in a long grey dressing-gown, his bare ankles protrudingbeneath, and his feet thrust into red heelless Turkish slippers.
Across his lap lay the short stock with the long lash which wehad noticed during the day.
His chin was cocked upward and hiseyes were fixed in a dreadful, rigid stare at the corner of theceiling.
Round his brow he had a peculiar yellow band, withbrownish speckles, which seemed to be bound tightly round hishead.
As we entered he made neither sound nor motion.
"The band!
the speckled band!"
whispered Holmes.
I took a step forward.
In an instant his strange headgear beganto move, and there reared itself from among his hair the squatdiamond-shaped head and puffed neck of a loathsome serpent.
"It is a swamp adder!"
cried Holmes; "the deadliest snake inIndia.
He has died within ten seconds of being bitten.
Violencedoes, in truth, recoil upon the violent, and the schemer fallsinto the pit which he digs for another.
Let us thrust thiscreature back into its den, and we can then remove Miss Stoner tosome place of shelter and let the county police know what hashappened."
As he spoke he drew the dog-whip swiftly from the dead man's lap,and throwing the noose round the reptile's neck he drew it fromits horrid perch and, carrying it at arm's length, threw it intothe iron safe, which he closed upon it.
Such are the true facts of the death of Dr. Grimesby Roylott, ofStoke Moran.
It is not necessary that I should prolong anarrative which has already run to too great a length by tellinghow we broke the sad news to the terrified girl, how we conveyedher by the morning train to the care of her good aunt at Harrow,of how the slow process of official inquiry came to theconclusion that the doctor met his fate while indiscreetlyplaying with a dangerous pet.
The little which I had yet to learnof the case was told me by Sherlock Holmes as we travelled backnext day.
"I had," said he, "come to an entirely erroneous conclusion whichshows, my dear Watson, how dangerous it always is to reason frominsufficient data.
The presence of the gipsies, and the use ofthe word 'band,' which was used by the poor girl, no doubt, toexplain the appearance which she had caught a hurried glimpse ofby the light of her match, were sufficient to put me upon anentirely wrong scent.
I can only claim the merit that I instantlyreconsidered my position when, however, it became clear to methat whatever danger threatened an occupant of the room could notcome either from the window or the door.
My attention wasspeedily drawn, as I have already remarked to you, to thisventilator, and to the bell-rope which hung down to the bed.
Thediscovery that this was a dummy, and that the bed was clamped tothe floor, instantly gave rise to the suspicion that the rope wasthere as a bridge for something passing through the hole andcoming to the bed.
The idea of a snake instantly occurred to me,and when I coupled it with my knowledge that the doctor wasfurnished with a supply of creatures from India, I felt that Iwas probably on the right track.
The idea of using a form ofpoison which could not possibly be discovered by any chemicaltest was just such a one as would occur to a clever and ruthlessman who had had an Eastern training.
The rapidity with which sucha poison would take effect would also, from his point of view, bean advantage.
It would be a sharp-eyed coroner, indeed, who coulddistinguish the two little dark punctures which would show wherethe poison fangs had done their work.
Then I thought of thewhistle.
Of course he must recall the snake before the morninglight revealed it to the victim.
He had trained it, probably bythe use of the milk which we saw, to return to him when summoned.
He would put it through this ventilator at the hour that hethought best, with the certainty that it would crawl down therope and land on the bed.
It might or might not bite theoccupant, perhaps she might escape every night for a week, butsooner or later she must fall a victim.
"I had come to these conclusions before ever I had entered hisroom.
An inspection of his chair showed me that he had been inthe habit of standing on it, which of course would be necessaryin order that he should reach the ventilator.
The sight of thesafe, the saucer of milk, and the loop of whipcord were enough tofinally dispel any doubts which may have remained.
The metallicclang heard by Miss Stoner was obviously caused by her stepfatherhastily closing the door of his safe upon its terrible occupant.
Having once made up my mind, you know the steps which I took inorder to put the matter to the proof.
I heard the creature hissas I have no doubt that you did also, and I instantly lit thelight and attacked it."
"With the result of driving it through the ventilator."
"And also with the result of causing it to turn upon its masterat the other side.
Some of the blows of my cane came home androused its snakish temper, so that it flew upon the first personit saw.
In this way I am no doubt indirectly responsible for Dr.Grimesby Roylott's death, and I cannot say that it is likely toweigh very heavily upon my conscience."
IX.
THE ADVENTURE OF THE ENGINEER'S THUMBOf all the problems which have been submitted to my friend, Mr.Sherlock Holmes, for solution during the years of our intimacy,there were only two which I was the means of introducing to hisnotice--that of Mr. Hatherley's thumb, and that of ColonelWarburton's madness.
Of these the latter may have afforded afiner field for an acute and original observer, but the other wasso strange in its inception and so dramatic in its details thatit may be the more worthy of being placed upon record, even if itgave my friend fewer openings for those deductive methods ofreasoning by which he achieved such remarkable results.
The storyhas, I believe, been told more than once in the newspapers, but,like all such narratives, its effect is much less striking whenset forth en bloc in a single half-column of print than when thefacts slowly evolve before your own eyes, and the mystery clearsgradually away as each new discovery furnishes a step which leadson to the complete truth.
At the time the circumstances made adeep impression upon me, and the lapse of two years has hardlyserved to weaken the effect.
It was in the summer of '89, not long after my marriage, that theevents occurred which I am now about to summarise.
I had returnedto civil practice and had finally abandoned Holmes in his BakerStreet rooms, although I continually visited him and occasionallyeven persuaded him to forgo his Bohemian habits so far as to comeand visit us.
My practice had steadily increased, and as Ihappened to live at no very great distance from PaddingtonStation, I got a few patients from among the officials.
One ofthese, whom I had cured of a painful and lingering disease, wasnever weary of advertising my virtues and of endeavouring to sendme on every sufferer over whom he might have any influence.
One morning, at a little before seven o'clock, I was awakened bythe maid tapping at the door to announce that two men had comefrom Paddington and were waiting in the consulting-room.
Idressed hurriedly, for I knew by experience that railway caseswere seldom trivial, and hastened downstairs.
As I descended, myold ally, the guard, came out of the room and closed the doortightly behind him.
"I've got him here," he whispered, jerking his thumb over hisshoulder; "he's all right."
"What is it, then?"
I asked, for his manner suggested that it wassome strange creature which he had caged up in my room.
"It's a new patient," he whispered.
"I thought I'd bring himround myself; then he couldn't slip away.
There he is, all safeand sound.
I must go now, Doctor; I have my dooties, just thesame as you."
And off he went, this trusty tout, without evengiving me time to thank him.
I entered my consulting-room and found a gentleman seated by thetable.
He was quietly dressed in a suit of heather tweed with asoft cloth cap which he had laid down upon my books.
Round one ofhis hands he had a handkerchief wrapped, which was mottled allover with bloodstains.
He was young, not more thanfive-and-twenty, I should say, with a strong, masculine face; buthe was exceedingly pale and gave me the impression of a man whowas suffering from some strong agitation, which it took all hisstrength of mind to control.
"I am sorry to knock you up so early, Doctor," said he, "but Ihave had a very serious accident during the night.
I came in bytrain this morning, and on inquiring at Paddington as to where Imight find a doctor, a worthy fellow very kindly escorted mehere.
I gave the maid a card, but I see that she has left it uponthe side-table."
I took it up and glanced at it.
"Mr. Victor Hatherley, hydraulicengineer, 16A, Victoria Street (3rd floor)."
That was the name,style, and abode of my morning visitor.
"I regret that I havekept you waiting," said I, sitting down in my library-chair.
"Youare fresh from a night journey, I understand, which is in itselfa monotonous occupation."
"Oh, my night could not be called monotonous," said he, andlaughed.
He laughed very heartily, with a high, ringing note,leaning back in his chair and shaking his sides.
All my medicalinstincts rose up against that laugh.
"Stop it!"
I cried; "pull yourself together!"
and I poured outsome water from a caraffe.
It was useless, however.
He was off in one of those hystericaloutbursts which come upon a strong nature when some great crisisis over and gone.
Presently he came to himself once more, veryweary and pale-looking.
"I have been making a fool of myself," he gasped.
"Not at all.
Drink this."
I dashed some brandy into the water,and the colour began to come back to his bloodless cheeks.
"That's better!"
said he.
"And now, Doctor, perhaps you wouldkindly attend to my thumb, or rather to the place where my thumbused to be."
He unwound the handkerchief and held out his hand.
It gave evenmy hardened nerves a shudder to look at it.
There were fourprotruding fingers and a horrid red, spongy surface where thethumb should have been.
It had been hacked or torn right out fromthe roots.
"Good heavens!"
I cried, "this is a terrible injury.
It must havebled considerably."
"Yes, it did.
I fainted when it was done, and I think that I musthave been senseless for a long time.
When I came to I found thatit was still bleeding, so I tied one end of my handkerchief verytightly round the wrist and braced it up with a twig."
"Excellent!
You should have been a surgeon."
"It is a question of hydraulics, you see, and came within my ownprovince."
"This has been done," said I, examining the wound, "by a veryheavy and sharp instrument."
"A thing like a cleaver," said he.
"An accident, I presume?"
"By no means."
"What!
a murderous attack?"
"Very murderous indeed."
"You horrify me."
I sponged the wound, cleaned it, dressed it, and finally coveredit over with cotton wadding and carbolised bandages.
He lay backwithout wincing, though he bit his lip from time to time.
"How is that?"
I asked when I had finished.
"Capital!
Between your brandy and your bandage, I feel a new man.
I was very weak, but I have had a good deal to go through."
"Perhaps you had better not speak of the matter.
It is evidentlytrying to your nerves."
"Oh, no, not now.
I shall have to tell my tale to the police;but, between ourselves, if it were not for the convincingevidence of this wound of mine, I should be surprised if theybelieved my statement, for it is a very extraordinary one, and Ihave not much in the way of proof with which to back it up; and,even if they believe me, the clues which I can give them are sovague that it is a question whether justice will be done."
"Ha!"
cried I, "if it is anything in the nature of a problemwhich you desire to see solved, I should strongly recommend youto come to my friend, Mr. Sherlock Holmes, before you go to theofficial police."
"Oh, I have heard of that fellow," answered my visitor, "and Ishould be very glad if he would take the matter up, though ofcourse I must use the official police as well.
Would you give mean introduction to him?"
"I'll do better.
I'll take you round to him myself."
"I should be immensely obliged to you."
"We'll call a cab and go together.
We shall just be in time tohave a little breakfast with him.
Do you feel equal to it?"
"Yes; I shall not feel easy until I have told my story."
"Then my servant will call a cab, and I shall be with you in aninstant."
I rushed upstairs, explained the matter shortly to mywife, and in five minutes was inside a hansom, driving with mynew acquaintance to Baker Street.
Sherlock Holmes was, as I expected, lounging about hissitting-room in his dressing-gown, reading the agony column of TheTimes and smoking his before-breakfast pipe, which was composedof all the plugs and dottles left from his smokes of the daybefore, all carefully dried and collected on the corner of themantelpiece.
He received us in his quietly genial fashion,ordered fresh rashers and eggs, and joined us in a hearty meal.
When it was concluded he settled our new acquaintance upon thesofa, placed a pillow beneath his head, and laid a glass ofbrandy and water within his reach.
"It is easy to see that your experience has been no common one,Mr. Hatherley," said he.
"Pray, lie down there and make yourselfabsolutely at home.
Tell us what you can, but stop when you aretired and keep up your strength with a little stimulant."
"Thank you," said my patient, "but I have felt another man sincethe doctor bandaged me, and I think that your breakfast hascompleted the cure.
I shall take up as little of your valuabletime as possible, so I shall start at once upon my peculiarexperiences."
Holmes sat in his big armchair with the weary, heavy-liddedexpression which veiled his keen and eager nature, while I satopposite to him, and we listened in silence to the strange storywhich our visitor detailed to us.
"You must know," said he, "that I am an orphan and a bachelor,residing alone in lodgings in London.
By profession I am ahydraulic engineer, and I have had considerable experience of mywork during the seven years that I was apprenticed to Venner &Matheson, the well-known firm, of Greenwich.
Two years ago,having served my time, and having also come into a fair sum ofmoney through my poor father's death, I determined to start inbusiness for myself and took professional chambers in VictoriaStreet.
"I suppose that everyone finds his first independent start inbusiness a dreary experience.
To me it has been exceptionally so.
During two years I have had three consultations and one smalljob, and that is absolutely all that my profession has broughtme.
My gross takings amount to 27 pounds 10s.
Every day, fromnine in the morning until four in the afternoon, I waited in mylittle den, until at last my heart began to sink, and I came tobelieve that I should never have any practice at all.
"Yesterday, however, just as I was thinking of leaving theoffice, my clerk entered to say there was a gentleman waiting whowished to see me upon business.
He brought up a card, too, withthe name of 'Colonel Lysander Stark' engraved upon it.
Close athis heels came the colonel himself, a man rather over the middlesize, but of an exceeding thinness.
I do not think that I haveever seen so thin a man.
His whole face sharpened away into noseand chin, and the skin of his cheeks was drawn quite tense overhis outstanding bones.
Yet this emaciation seemed to be hisnatural habit, and due to no disease, for his eye was bright, hisstep brisk, and his bearing assured.
He was plainly but neatlydressed, and his age, I should judge, would be nearer forty thanthirty.
"'Mr.
Hatherley?'
said he, with something of a German accent.
'You have been recommended to me, Mr. Hatherley, as being a manwho is not only proficient in his profession but is also discreetand capable of preserving a secret.'
"I bowed, feeling as flattered as any young man would at such anaddress.
'May I ask who it was who gave me so good a character?'
"'Well, perhaps it is better that I should not tell you that justat this moment.
I have it from the same source that you are bothan orphan and a bachelor and are residing alone in London.'
"'That is quite correct,' I answered; 'but you will excuse me ifI say that I cannot see how all this bears upon my professionalqualifications.
I understand that it was on a professional matterthat you wished to speak to me?'
"'Undoubtedly so.
But you will find that all I say is really tothe point.
I have a professional commission for you, but absolutesecrecy is quite essential--absolute secrecy, you understand, andof course we may expect that more from a man who is alone thanfrom one who lives in the bosom of his family.'
"'If I promise to keep a secret,' said I, 'you may absolutelydepend upon my doing so.'
"He looked very hard at me as I spoke, and it seemed to me that Ihad never seen so suspicious and questioning an eye.
"'Do you promise, then?'
said he at last.
"'Yes, I promise.'
"'Absolute and complete silence before, during, and after?
Noreference to the matter at all, either in word or writing?'
"'I have already given you my word.'
"'Very good.'
He suddenly sprang up, and darting like lightningacross the room he flung open the door.
The passage outside wasempty.
"'That's all right,' said he, coming back.
'I know that clerks aresometimes curious as to their master's affairs.
Now we can talkin safety.'
He drew up his chair very close to mine and began tostare at me again with the same questioning and thoughtful look.
"A feeling of repulsion, and of something akin to fear had begunto rise within me at the strange antics of this fleshless man.
Even my dread of losing a client could not restrain me fromshowing my impatience.
"'I beg that you will state your business, sir,' said I; 'my timeis of value.'
Heaven forgive me for that last sentence, but thewords came to my lips.
"'How would fifty guineas for a night's work suit you?'
he asked.
"'Most admirably.'
"'I say a night's work, but an hour's would be nearer the mark.
Isimply want your opinion about a hydraulic stamping machine whichhas got out of gear.
If you show us what is wrong we shall soonset it right ourselves.
What do you think of such a commission asthat?'
"'The work appears to be light and the pay munificent.'
"'Precisely so.
We shall want you to come to-night by the lasttrain.'
"'Where to?'
"'To Eyford, in Berkshire.
It is a little place near the bordersof Oxfordshire, and within seven miles of Reading.
There is atrain from Paddington which would bring you there at about11:15.'
"'Very good.'
"'I shall come down in a carriage to meet you.'
"'There is a drive, then?'
"'Yes, our little place is quite out in the country.
It is a goodseven miles from Eyford Station.'
"'Then we can hardly get there before midnight.
I suppose therewould be no chance of a train back.
I should be compelled to stopthe night.'
"'Yes, we could easily give you a shake-down.'
"'That is very awkward.
Could I not come at some more convenienthour?'
"'We have judged it best that you should come late.
It is torecompense you for any inconvenience that we are paying to you, ayoung and unknown man, a fee which would buy an opinion from thevery heads of your profession.
Still, of course, if you wouldlike to draw out of the business, there is plenty of time to doso.'
"I thought of the fifty guineas, and of how very useful theywould be to me.
'Not at all,' said I, 'I shall be very happy toaccommodate myself to your wishes.
I should like, however, tounderstand a little more clearly what it is that you wish me todo.'
"'Quite so.
It is very natural that the pledge of secrecy whichwe have exacted from you should have aroused your curiosity.
Ihave no wish to commit you to anything without your having it alllaid before you.
I suppose that we are absolutely safe fromeavesdroppers?'
"'Entirely.'
"'Then the matter stands thus.
You are probably aware thatfuller's-earth is a valuable product, and that it is only foundin one or two places in England?'
"'I have heard so.'
"'Some little time ago I bought a small place--a very smallplace--within ten miles of Reading.
I was fortunate enough todiscover that there was a deposit of fuller's-earth in one of myfields.
On examining it, however, I found that this deposit was acomparatively small one, and that it formed a link between twovery much larger ones upon the right and left--both of them,however, in the grounds of my neighbours.
These good people wereabsolutely ignorant that their land contained that which wasquite as valuable as a gold-mine.
Naturally, it was to myinterest to buy their land before they discovered its true value,but unfortunately I had no capital by which I could do this.
Itook a few of my friends into the secret, however, and theysuggested that we should quietly and secretly work our own littledeposit and that in this way we should earn the money which wouldenable us to buy the neighbouring fields.
This we have now beendoing for some time, and in order to help us in our operations weerected a hydraulic press.
This press, as I have alreadyexplained, has got out of order, and we wish your advice upon thesubject.
We guard our secret very jealously, however, and if itonce became known that we had hydraulic engineers coming to ourlittle house, it would soon rouse inquiry, and then, if the factscame out, it would be good-bye to any chance of getting thesefields and carrying out our plans.
That is why I have made youpromise me that you will not tell a human being that you aregoing to Eyford to-night.
I hope that I make it all plain?'
"'I quite follow you,' said I.
'The only point which I could notquite understand was what use you could make of a hydraulic pressin excavating fuller's-earth, which, as I understand, is dug outlike gravel from a pit.'
"'Ah!'
said he carelessly, 'we have our own process.
We compressthe earth into bricks, so as to remove them without revealingwhat they are.
But that is a mere detail.
I have taken you fullyinto my confidence now, Mr. Hatherley, and I have shown you how Itrust you.'
He rose as he spoke.
'I shall expect you, then, atEyford at 11:15.'
"'I shall certainly be there.'
"'And not a word to a soul.'
He looked at me with a last long,questioning gaze, and then, pressing my hand in a cold, dankgrasp, he hurried from the room.
"Well, when I came to think it all over in cool blood I was verymuch astonished, as you may both think, at this sudden commissionwhich had been intrusted to me.
On the one hand, of course, I wasglad, for the fee was at least tenfold what I should have askedhad I set a price upon my own services, and it was possible thatthis order might lead to other ones.
On the other hand, the faceand manner of my patron had made an unpleasant impression uponme, and I could not think that his explanation of thefuller's-earth was sufficient to explain the necessity for mycoming at midnight, and his extreme anxiety lest I should tellanyone of my errand.
However, I threw all fears to the winds, atea hearty supper, drove to Paddington, and started off, havingobeyed to the letter the injunction as to holding my tongue.
"At Reading I had to change not only my carriage but my station.
However, I was in time for the last train to Eyford, and Ireached the little dim-lit station after eleven o'clock.
I was theonly passenger who got out there, and there was no one upon theplatform save a single sleepy porter with a lantern.
As I passedout through the wicket gate, however, I found my acquaintance ofthe morning waiting in the shadow upon the other side.
Without aword he grasped my arm and hurried me into a carriage, the doorof which was standing open.
He drew up the windows on eitherside, tapped on the wood-work, and away we went as fast as thehorse could go."
"One horse?"
interjected Holmes.
"Yes, only one."
"Did you observe the colour?"
"Yes, I saw it by the side-lights when I was stepping into thecarriage.
It was a chestnut."
"Tired-looking or fresh?"
"Oh, fresh and glossy."
"Thank you.
I am sorry to have interrupted you.
Pray continueyour most interesting statement."
"Away we went then, and we drove for at least an hour.
ColonelLysander Stark had said that it was only seven miles, but Ishould think, from the rate that we seemed to go, and from thetime that we took, that it must have been nearer twelve.
He satat my side in silence all the time, and I was aware, more thanonce when I glanced in his direction, that he was looking at mewith great intensity.
The country roads seem to be not very goodin that part of the world, for we lurched and jolted terribly.
Itried to look out of the windows to see something of where wewere, but they were made of frosted glass, and I could make outnothing save the occasional bright blur of a passing light.
Nowand then I hazarded some remark to break the monotony of thejourney, but the colonel answered only in monosyllables, and theconversation soon flagged.
At last, however, the bumping of theroad was exchanged for the crisp smoothness of a gravel-drive,and the carriage came to a stand.
Colonel Lysander Stark sprangout, and, as I followed after him, pulled me swiftly into a porchwhich gaped in front of us.
We stepped, as it were, right out ofthe carriage and into the hall, so that I failed to catch themost fleeting glance of the front of the house.
The instant thatI had crossed the threshold the door slammed heavily behind us,and I heard faintly the rattle of the wheels as the carriagedrove away.
"It was pitch dark inside the house, and the colonel fumbledabout looking for matches and muttering under his breath.
Suddenly a door opened at the other end of the passage, and along, golden bar of light shot out in our direction.
It grewbroader, and a woman appeared with a lamp in her hand, which sheheld above her head, pushing her face forward and peering at us.
I could see that she was pretty, and from the gloss with whichthe light shone upon her dark dress I knew that it was a richmaterial.
She spoke a few words in a foreign tongue in a tone asthough asking a question, and when my companion answered in agruff monosyllable she gave such a start that the lamp nearlyfell from her hand.
Colonel Stark went up to her, whisperedsomething in her ear, and then, pushing her back into the roomfrom whence she had come, he walked towards me again with thelamp in his hand.
"'Perhaps you will have the kindness to wait in this room for afew minutes,' said he, throwing open another door.
It was aquiet, little, plainly furnished room, with a round table in thecentre, on which several German books were scattered.
ColonelStark laid down the lamp on the top of a harmonium beside thedoor.
'I shall not keep you waiting an instant,' said he, andvanished into the darkness.
"I glanced at the books upon the table, and in spite of myignorance of German I could see that two of them were treatiseson science, the others being volumes of poetry.
Then I walkedacross to the window, hoping that I might catch some glimpse ofthe country-side, but an oak shutter, heavily barred, was foldedacross it.
It was a wonderfully silent house.
There was an oldclock ticking loudly somewhere in the passage, but otherwiseeverything was deadly still.
A vague feeling of uneasiness beganto steal over me.
Who were these German people, and what werethey doing living in this strange, out-of-the-way place?
Andwhere was the place?
I was ten miles or so from Eyford, that wasall I knew, but whether north, south, east, or west I had noidea.
For that matter, Reading, and possibly other large towns,were within that radius, so the place might not be so secluded,after all.
Yet it was quite certain, from the absolute stillness,that we were in the country.
I paced up and down the room,humming a tune under my breath to keep up my spirits and feelingthat I was thoroughly earning my fifty-guinea fee.
"Suddenly, without any preliminary sound in the midst of theutter stillness, the door of my room swung slowly open.
The womanwas standing in the aperture, the darkness of the hall behindher, the yellow light from my lamp beating upon her eager andbeautiful face.
I could see at a glance that she was sick withfear, and the sight sent a chill to my own heart.
She held up oneshaking finger to warn me to be silent, and she shot a fewwhispered words of broken English at me, her eyes glancing back,like those of a frightened horse, into the gloom behind her.
"'I would go,' said she, trying hard, as it seemed to me, tospeak calmly; 'I would go.
I should not stay here.
There is nogood for you to do.'
"'But, madam,' said I, 'I have not yet done what I came for.
Icannot possibly leave until I have seen the machine.'
"'It is not worth your while to wait,' she went on.
'You can passthrough the door; no one hinders.'
And then, seeing that I smiledand shook my head, she suddenly threw aside her constraint andmade a step forward, with her hands wrung together.
'For the loveof Heaven!'
she whispered, 'get away from here before it is toolate!'
"But I am somewhat headstrong by nature, and the more ready toengage in an affair when there is some obstacle in the way.
Ithought of my fifty-guinea fee, of my wearisome journey, and ofthe unpleasant night which seemed to be before me.
Was it all togo for nothing?
Why should I slink away without having carriedout my commission, and without the payment which was my due?
Thiswoman might, for all I knew, be a monomaniac.
With a stoutbearing, therefore, though her manner had shaken me more than Icared to confess, I still shook my head and declared my intentionof remaining where I was.
She was about to renew her entreatieswhen a door slammed overhead, and the sound of several footstepswas heard upon the stairs.
She listened for an instant, threw upher hands with a despairing gesture, and vanished as suddenly andas noiselessly as she had come.
"The newcomers were Colonel Lysander Stark and a short thick manwith a chinchilla beard growing out of the creases of his doublechin, who was introduced to me as Mr. Ferguson.
"'This is my secretary and manager,' said the colonel.
'By theway, I was under the impression that I left this door shut justnow.
I fear that you have felt the draught.'
"'On the contrary,' said I, 'I opened the door myself because Ifelt the room to be a little close.'
"He shot one of his suspicious looks at me.
'Perhaps we hadbetter proceed to business, then,' said he.
'Mr.
Ferguson and Iwill take you up to see the machine.'
"'I had better put my hat on, I suppose.'
"'Oh, no, it is in the house.'
"'What, you dig fuller's-earth in the house?'
"'No, no.
This is only where we compress it.
But never mind that.
All we wish you to do is to examine the machine and to let usknow what is wrong with it.'
"We went upstairs together, the colonel first with the lamp, thefat manager and I behind him.
It was a labyrinth of an old house,with corridors, passages, narrow winding staircases, and littlelow doors, the thresholds of which were hollowed out by thegenerations who had crossed them.
There were no carpets and nosigns of any furniture above the ground floor, while the plasterwas peeling off the walls, and the damp was breaking through ingreen, unhealthy blotches.
I tried to put on as unconcerned anair as possible, but I had not forgotten the warnings of thelady, even though I disregarded them, and I kept a keen eye uponmy two companions.
Ferguson appeared to be a morose and silentman, but I could see from the little that he said that he was atleast a fellow-countryman.
"Colonel Lysander Stark stopped at last before a low door, whichhe unlocked.
Within was a small, square room, in which the threeof us could hardly get at one time.
Ferguson remained outside,and the colonel ushered me in.
"'We are now,' said he, 'actually within the hydraulic press, andit would be a particularly unpleasant thing for us if anyone wereto turn it on.
The ceiling of this small chamber is really theend of the descending piston, and it comes down with the force ofmany tons upon this metal floor.
There are small lateral columnsof water outside which receive the force, and which transmit andmultiply it in the manner which is familiar to you.
The machinegoes readily enough, but there is some stiffness in the workingof it, and it has lost a little of its force.
Perhaps you willhave the goodness to look it over and to show us how we can setit right.'
"I took the lamp from him, and I examined the machine verythoroughly.
It was indeed a gigantic one, and capable ofexercising enormous pressure.
When I passed outside, however, andpressed down the levers which controlled it, I knew at once bythe whishing sound that there was a slight leakage, which alloweda regurgitation of water through one of the side cylinders.
Anexamination showed that one of the india-rubber bands which wasround the head of a driving-rod had shrunk so as not quite tofill the socket along which it worked.
This was clearly the causeof the loss of power, and I pointed it out to my companions, whofollowed my remarks very carefully and asked several practicalquestions as to how they should proceed to set it right.
When Ihad made it clear to them, I returned to the main chamber of themachine and took a good look at it to satisfy my own curiosity.
It was obvious at a glance that the story of the fuller's-earthwas the merest fabrication, for it would be absurd to supposethat so powerful an engine could be designed for so inadequate apurpose.
The walls were of wood, but the floor consisted of alarge iron trough, and when I came to examine it I could see acrust of metallic deposit all over it.
I had stooped and wasscraping at this to see exactly what it was when I heard amuttered exclamation in German and saw the cadaverous face of thecolonel looking down at me.
"'What are you doing there?'
he asked.
"I felt angry at having been tricked by so elaborate a story asthat which he had told me.
'I was admiring your fuller's-earth,'said I; 'I think that I should be better able to advise you as toyour machine if I knew what the exact purpose was for which itwas used.'
"The instant that I uttered the words I regretted the rashness ofmy speech.
His face set hard, and a baleful light sprang up inhis grey eyes.
"'Very well,' said he, 'you shall know all about the machine.'
Hetook a step backward, slammed the little door, and turned the keyin the lock.
I rushed towards it and pulled at the handle, but itwas quite secure, and did not give in the least to my kicks andshoves.
'Hullo!'
I yelled.
'Hullo!
Colonel!
Let me out!'
"And then suddenly in the silence I heard a sound which sent myheart into my mouth.
It was the clank of the levers and the swishof the leaking cylinder.
He had set the engine at work.
The lampstill stood upon the floor where I had placed it when examiningthe trough.
By its light I saw that the black ceiling was comingdown upon me, slowly, jerkily, but, as none knew better thanmyself, with a force which must within a minute grind me to ashapeless pulp.
I threw myself, screaming, against the door, anddragged with my nails at the lock.
I implored the colonel to letme out, but the remorseless clanking of the levers drowned mycries.
The ceiling was only a foot or two above my head, and withmy hand upraised I could feel its hard, rough surface.
Then itflashed through my mind that the pain of my death would dependvery much upon the position in which I met it.
If I lay on myface the weight would come upon my spine, and I shuddered tothink of that dreadful snap.
Easier the other way, perhaps; andyet, had I the nerve to lie and look up at that deadly blackshadow wavering down upon me?
Already I was unable to standerect, when my eye caught something which brought a gush of hopeback to my heart.
"I have said that though the floor and ceiling were of iron, thewalls were of wood.
As I gave a last hurried glance around, I sawa thin line of yellow light between two of the boards, whichbroadened and broadened as a small panel was pushed backward.
Foran instant I could hardly believe that here was indeed a doorwhich led away from death.
The next instant I threw myselfthrough, and lay half-fainting upon the other side.
The panel hadclosed again behind me, but the crash of the lamp, and a fewmoments afterwards the clang of the two slabs of metal, told mehow narrow had been my escape.
"I was recalled to myself by a frantic plucking at my wrist, andI found myself lying upon the stone floor of a narrow corridor,while a woman bent over me and tugged at me with her left hand,while she held a candle in her right.
It was the same good friendwhose warning I had so foolishly rejected.
"'Come!
come!'
she cried breathlessly.
'They will be here in amoment.
They will see that you are not there.
Oh, do not wastethe so-precious time, but come!'
"This time, at least, I did not scorn her advice.
I staggered tomy feet and ran with her along the corridor and down a windingstair.
The latter led to another broad passage, and just as wereached it we heard the sound of running feet and the shouting oftwo voices, one answering the other from the floor on which  wewere and from the one beneath.
My guide stopped and looked abouther like one  who is at her wit's end.
Then she threw open a doorwhich led into a bedroom, through the window of which the moonwas shining brightly.
"'It is your only chance,' said she.
'It is high, but it may bethat you can jump it.'
"As she spoke a light sprang into view at the further end of thepassage, and I saw the lean figure of Colonel Lysander Starkrushing forward with a lantern in one hand and a weapon like abutcher's cleaver in the other.
I rushed across the bedroom,flung open the window, and looked out.
How quiet and sweet andwholesome the garden looked in the moonlight, and it could not bemore than thirty feet down.
I clambered out upon the sill, but Ihesitated to jump until I should have heard what passed betweenmy saviour and the ruffian who pursued me.
If she were ill-used,then at any risks I was determined to go back to her assistance.
The thought had hardly flashed through my mind before he was atthe door, pushing his way past her; but she threw her arms roundhim and tried to hold him back.
"'Fritz!
Fritz!'
she cried in English, 'remember your promiseafter the last time.
You said it should not be again.
He will besilent!
Oh, he will be silent!'
"'You are mad, Elise!'
he shouted, struggling to break away fromher.
'You will be the ruin of us.
He has seen too much.
Let mepass, I say!'
He dashed her to one side, and, rushing to thewindow, cut at me with his heavy weapon.
I had let myself go, andwas hanging by the hands to the sill, when his blow fell.
I wasconscious of a dull pain, my grip loosened, and I fell into thegarden below.
"I was shaken but not hurt by the fall; so I picked myself up andrushed off among the bushes as hard as I could run, for Iunderstood that I was far from being out of danger yet.
Suddenly,however, as I ran, a deadly dizziness and sickness came over me.
I glanced down at my hand, which was throbbing painfully, andthen, for the first time, saw that my thumb had been cut off andthat the blood was pouring from my wound.
I endeavoured to tie myhandkerchief round it, but there came a sudden buzzing in myears, and next moment I fell in a dead faint among therose-bushes.
"How long I remained unconscious I cannot tell.
It must have beena very long time, for the moon had sunk, and a bright morning wasbreaking when I came to myself.
My clothes were all sodden withdew, and my coat-sleeve was drenched with blood from my woundedthumb.
The smarting of it recalled in an instant all theparticulars of my night's adventure, and I sprang to my feet withthe feeling that I might hardly yet be safe from my pursuers.
Butto my astonishment, when I came to look round me, neither housenor garden were to be seen.
I had been lying in an angle of thehedge close by the highroad, and just a little lower down was along building, which proved, upon my approaching it, to be thevery station at which I had arrived upon the previous night.
Wereit not for the ugly wound upon my hand, all that had passedduring those dreadful hours might have been an evil dream.
"Half dazed, I went into the station and asked about the morningtrain.
There would be one to Reading in less than an hour.
Thesame porter was on duty, I found, as had been there when Iarrived.
I inquired of him whether he had ever heard of ColonelLysander Stark.
The name was strange to him.
Had he observed acarriage the night before waiting for me?
No, he had not.
Wasthere a police-station anywhere near?
There was one about threemiles off.
"It was too far for me to go, weak and ill as I was.
I determinedto wait until I got back to town before telling my story to thepolice.
It was a little past six when I arrived, so I went firstto have my wound dressed, and then the doctor was kind enough tobring me along here.
I put the case into your hands and shall doexactly what you advise."
We both sat in silence for some little time after listening tothis extraordinary narrative.
Then Sherlock Holmes pulled downfrom the shelf one of the ponderous commonplace books in which heplaced his cuttings.
"Here is an advertisement which will interest you," said he.
"Itappeared in all the papers about a year ago.
Listen to this:'Lost, on the 9th inst., Mr. Jeremiah Hayling, agedtwenty-six, a hydraulic engineer.
Left his lodgings at teno'clock at night, and has not been heard of since.
Wasdressed in,' etc., etc.
Ha!
That represents the last time thatthe colonel needed to have his machine overhauled, I fancy."
"Good heavens!"
cried my patient.
"Then that explains what thegirl said."
"Undoubtedly.
It is quite clear that the colonel was a cool anddesperate man, who was absolutely determined that nothing shouldstand in the way of his little game, like those out-and-outpirates who will leave no survivor from a captured ship.
Well,every moment now is precious, so if you feel equal to it we shallgo down to Scotland Yard at once as a preliminary to starting forEyford."
Some three hours or so afterwards we were all in the traintogether, bound from Reading to the little Berkshire village.
There were Sherlock Holmes, the hydraulic engineer, InspectorBradstreet, of Scotland Yard, a plain-clothes man, and myself.
Bradstreet had spread an ordnance map of the county out upon theseat and was busy with his compasses drawing a circle with Eyfordfor its centre.
"There you are," said he.
"That circle is drawn at a radius often miles from the village.
The place we want must be somewherenear that line.
You said ten miles, I think, sir."
"It was an hour's good drive."
"And you think that they brought you back all that way when youwere unconscious?"
"They must have done so.
I have a confused memory, too, of havingbeen lifted and conveyed somewhere."
"What I cannot understand," said I, "is why they should havespared you when they found you lying fainting in the garden.
Perhaps the villain was softened by the woman's entreaties."
"I hardly think that likely.
I never saw a more inexorable facein my life."
"Oh, we shall soon clear up all that," said Bradstreet.
"Well, Ihave drawn my circle, and I only wish I knew at what point uponit the folk that we are in search of are to be found."
"I think I could lay my finger on it," said Holmes quietly.
"Really, now!"
cried the inspector, "you have formed youropinion!
Come, now, we shall see who agrees with you.
I say it issouth, for the country is more deserted there."
"And I say east," said my patient.
"I am for west," remarked the plain-clothes man.
"There areseveral quiet little villages up there."
"And I am for north," said I, "because there are no hills there,and our friend says that he did not notice the carriage go upany."
"Come," cried the inspector, laughing; "it's a very prettydiversity of opinion.
We have boxed the compass among us.
Who doyou give your casting vote to?"
"You are all wrong."
"But we can't all be."
"Oh, yes, you can.
This is my point."
He placed his finger in thecentre of the circle.
"This is where we shall find them."
"But the twelve-mile drive?"
gasped Hatherley.
"Six out and six back.
Nothing simpler.
You say yourself that thehorse was fresh and glossy when you got in.
How could it be thatif it had gone twelve miles over heavy roads?"
"Indeed, it is a likely ruse enough," observed Bradstreetthoughtfully.
"Of course there can be no doubt as to the natureof this gang."
"None at all," said Holmes.
"They are coiners on a large scale,and have used the machine to form the amalgam which has taken theplace of silver."
"We have known for some time that a clever gang was at work,"said the inspector.
"They have been turning out half-crowns bythe thousand.
We even traced them as far as Reading, but couldget no farther, for they had covered their traces in a way thatshowed that they were very old hands.
But now, thanks to thislucky chance, I think that we have got them right enough."
But the inspector was mistaken, for those criminals were notdestined to fall into the hands of justice.
As we rolled intoEyford Station we saw a gigantic column of smoke which streamedup from behind a small clump of trees in the neighbourhood andhung like an immense ostrich feather over the landscape.
"A house on fire?"
asked Bradstreet as the train steamed offagain on its way.
"Yes, sir!"
said the station-master.
"When did it break out?"
"I hear that it was during the night, sir, but it has got worse,and the whole place is in a blaze."
"Whose house is it?"
"Dr.
Becher's."
"Tell me," broke in the engineer, "is Dr. Becher a German, verythin, with a long, sharp nose?"
The station-master laughed heartily.
"No, sir, Dr. Becher is anEnglishman, and there isn't a man in the parish who has abetter-lined waistcoat.
But he has a gentleman staying with him,a patient, as I understand, who is a foreigner, and he looks asif a little good Berkshire beef would do him no harm."
The station-master had not finished his speech before we were allhastening in the direction of the fire.
The road topped a lowhill, and there was a great widespread whitewashed building infront of us, spouting fire at every chink and window, while inthe garden in front three fire-engines were vainly striving tokeep the flames under.
"That's it!"
cried Hatherley, in intense excitement.
"There isthe gravel-drive, and there are the rose-bushes where I lay.
Thatsecond window is the one that I jumped from."
"Well, at least," said Holmes, "you have had your revenge uponthem.
There can be no question that it was your oil-lamp which,when it was crushed in the press, set fire to the wooden walls,though no doubt they were too excited in the chase after you toobserve it at the time.
Now keep your eyes open in this crowd foryour friends of last night, though I very much fear that they area good hundred miles off by now."
And Holmes' fears came to be realised, for from that day to thisno word has ever been heard either of the beautiful woman, thesinister German, or the morose Englishman.
Early that morning apeasant had met a cart containing several people and some verybulky boxes driving rapidly in the direction of Reading, butthere all traces of the fugitives disappeared, and even Holmes'ingenuity failed ever to discover the least clue as to theirwhereabouts.
The firemen had been much perturbed at the strange arrangementswhich they had found within, and still more so by discovering anewly severed human thumb upon a window-sill of the second floor.
About sunset, however, their efforts were at last successful, andthey subdued the flames, but not before the roof had fallen in,and the whole place been reduced to such absolute ruin that, savesome twisted cylinders and iron piping, not a trace remained ofthe machinery which had cost our unfortunate acquaintance sodearly.
Large masses of nickel and of tin were discovered storedin an out-house, but no coins were to be found, which may haveexplained the presence of those bulky boxes which have beenalready referred to.
How our hydraulic engineer had been conveyed from the garden tothe spot where he recovered his senses might have remainedforever a mystery were it not for the soft mould, which told us avery plain tale.
He had evidently been carried down by twopersons, one of whom had remarkably small feet and the otherunusually large ones.
On the whole, it was most probable that thesilent Englishman, being less bold or less murderous than hiscompanion, had assisted the woman to bear the unconscious man outof the way of danger.
"Well," said our engineer ruefully as we took our seats to returnonce more to London, "it has been a pretty business for me!
Ihave lost my thumb and I have lost a fifty-guinea fee, and whathave I gained?"
"Experience," said Holmes, laughing.
"Indirectly it may be ofvalue, you know; you have only to put it into words to gain thereputation of being excellent company for the remainder of yourexistence."
X.
THE ADVENTURE OF THE NOBLE BACHELORThe Lord St. Simon marriage, and its curious termination, havelong ceased to be a subject of interest in those exalted circlesin which the unfortunate bridegroom moves.
Fresh scandals haveeclipsed it, and their more piquant details have drawn thegossips away from this four-year-old drama.
As I have reason tobelieve, however, that the full facts have never been revealed tothe general public, and as my friend Sherlock Holmes had aconsiderable share in clearing the matter up, I feel that nomemoir of him would be complete without some little sketch ofthis remarkable episode.
It was a few weeks before my own marriage, during the days when Iwas still sharing rooms with Holmes in Baker Street, that he camehome from an afternoon stroll to find a letter on the tablewaiting for him.
I had remained indoors all day, for the weatherhad taken a sudden turn to rain, with high autumnal winds, andthe Jezail bullet which I had brought back in one of my limbs asa relic of my Afghan campaign throbbed with dull persistence.
With my body in one easy-chair and my legs upon another, I hadsurrounded myself with a cloud of newspapers until at last,saturated with the news of the day, I tossed them all aside andlay listless, watching the huge crest and monogram upon theenvelope upon the table and wondering lazily who my friend'snoble correspondent could be.
"Here is a very fashionable epistle," I remarked as he entered.
"Your morning letters, if I remember right, were from afish-monger and a tide-waiter."
"Yes, my correspondence has certainly the charm of variety," heanswered, smiling, "and the humbler are usually the moreinteresting.
This looks like one of those unwelcome socialsummonses which call upon a man either to be bored or to lie."
He broke the seal and glanced over the contents.
"Oh, come, it may prove to be something of interest, after all."
"Not social, then?"
"No, distinctly professional."
"And from a noble client?"
"One of the highest in England."
"My dear fellow, I congratulate you."
"I assure you, Watson, without affectation, that the status of myclient is a matter of less moment to me than the interest of hiscase.
It is just possible, however, that that also may not bewanting in this new investigation.
You have been reading thepapers diligently of late, have you not?"
"It looks like it," said I ruefully, pointing to a huge bundle inthe corner.
"I have had nothing else to do."
"It is fortunate, for you will perhaps be able to post me up.
Iread nothing except the criminal news and the agony column.
Thelatter is always instructive.
But if you have followed recentevents so closely you must have read about Lord St. Simon and hiswedding?"
"Oh, yes, with the deepest interest."
"That is well.
The letter which I hold in my hand is from LordSt. Simon.
I will read it to you, and in return you must turnover these papers and let me have whatever bears upon the matter.
This is what he says:"'MY DEAR MR. SHERLOCK HOLMES:--Lord Backwater tells me that Imay place implicit reliance upon your judgment and discretion.
Ihave determined, therefore, to call upon you and to consult youin reference to the very painful event which has occurred inconnection with my wedding.
Mr. Lestrade, of Scotland Yard, isacting already in the matter, but he assures me that he sees noobjection to your co-operation, and that he even thinks thatit might be of some assistance.
I will call at four o'clock inthe afternoon, and, should you have any other engagement at thattime, I hope that you will postpone it, as this matter is ofparamount importance.
Yours faithfully, ST.
SIMON.'
"It is dated from Grosvenor Mansions, written with a quill pen,and the noble lord has had the misfortune to get a smear of inkupon the outer side of his right little finger," remarked Holmesas he folded up the epistle.
"He says four o'clock.
It is three now.
He will be here in anhour."
"Then I have just time, with your assistance, to get clear uponthe subject.
Turn over those papers and arrange the extracts intheir order of time, while I take a glance as to who our clientis."
He picked a red-covered volume from a line of books ofreference beside the mantelpiece.
"Here he is," said he, sittingdown and flattening it out upon his knee.
"'Lord Robert Walsinghamde Vere St. Simon, second son of the Duke of Balmoral.'
Hum!
'Arms:Azure, three caltrops in chief over a fess sable.
Born in 1846.'
He's forty-one years of age, which is mature for marriage.
WasUnder-Secretary for the colonies in a late administration.
TheDuke, his father, was at one time Secretary for Foreign Affairs.
They inherit Plantagenet blood by direct descent, and Tudor onthe distaff side.
Ha!
Well, there is nothing very instructive inall this.
I think that I must turn to you Watson, for somethingmore solid."
"I have very little difficulty in finding what I want," said I,"for the facts are quite recent, and the matter struck me asremarkable.
I feared to refer them to you, however, as I knewthat you had an inquiry on hand and that you disliked theintrusion of other matters."
"Oh, you mean the little problem of the Grosvenor Squarefurniture van.
That is quite cleared up now--though, indeed, itwas obvious from the first.
Pray give me the results of yournewspaper selections."
"Here is the first notice which I can find.
It is in the personalcolumn of the Morning Post, and dates, as you see, some weeksback: 'A marriage has been arranged,' it says, 'and will, ifrumour is correct, very shortly take place, between Lord RobertSt. Simon, second son of the Duke of Balmoral, and Miss HattyDoran, the only daughter of Aloysius Doran.
Esq., of SanFrancisco, Cal., U.S.A.' That is all."
"Terse and to the point," remarked Holmes, stretching his long,thin legs towards the fire.
"There was a paragraph amplifying this in one of the societypapers of the same week.
Ah, here it is: 'There will soon be acall for protection in the marriage market, for the presentfree-trade principle appears to tell heavily against our homeproduct.
One by one the management of the noble houses of GreatBritain is passing into the hands of our fair cousins from acrossthe Atlantic.
An important addition has been made during the lastweek to the list of the prizes which have been borne away bythese charming invaders.
Lord St. Simon, who has shown himselffor over twenty years proof against the little god's arrows, hasnow definitely announced his approaching marriage with Miss HattyDoran, the fascinating daughter of a California millionaire.
MissDoran, whose graceful figure and striking face attracted muchattention at the Westbury House festivities, is an only child,and it is currently reported that her dowry will run toconsiderably over the six figures, with expectancies for thefuture.
As it is an open secret that the Duke of Balmoral hasbeen compelled to sell his pictures within the last few years,and as Lord St. Simon has no property of his own save the smallestate of Birchmoor, it is obvious that the Californian heiressis not the only gainer by an alliance which will enable her tomake the easy and common transition from a Republican lady to aBritish peeress.'"
"Anything else?"
asked Holmes, yawning.
"Oh, yes; plenty.
Then there is another note in the Morning Postto say that the marriage would be an absolutely quiet one, that itwould be at St. George's, Hanover Square, that only half a dozenintimate friends would be invited, and that the party wouldreturn to the furnished house at Lancaster Gate which has beentaken by Mr. Aloysius Doran.
Two days later--that is, onWednesday last--there is a curt announcement that the wedding hadtaken place, and that the honeymoon would be passed at LordBackwater's place, near Petersfield.
Those are all the noticeswhich appeared before the disappearance of the bride."
"Before the what?"
asked Holmes with a start.
"The vanishing of the lady."
"When did she vanish, then?"
"At the wedding breakfast."
"Indeed.
This is more interesting than it promised to be; quitedramatic, in fact."
"Yes; it struck me as being a little out of the common."
"They often vanish before the ceremony, and occasionally duringthe honeymoon; but I cannot call to mind anything quite so promptas this.
Pray let me have the details."
"I warn you that they are very incomplete."
"Perhaps we may make them less so."
"Such as they are, they are set forth in a single article of amorning paper of yesterday, which I will read to you.
It isheaded, 'Singular Occurrence at a Fashionable Wedding':"'The family of Lord Robert St. Simon has been thrown into thegreatest consternation by the strange and painful episodes whichhave taken place in connection with his wedding.
The ceremony, asshortly announced in the papers of yesterday, occurred on theprevious morning; but it is only now that it has been possible toconfirm the strange rumours which have been so persistentlyfloating about.
In spite of the attempts of the friends to hushthe matter up, so much public attention has now been drawn to itthat no good purpose can be served by affecting to disregard whatis a common subject for conversation.
"'The ceremony, which was performed at St. George's, HanoverSquare, was a very quiet one, no one being present save thefather of the bride, Mr. Aloysius Doran, the Duchess of Balmoral,Lord Backwater, Lord Eustace and Lady Clara St. Simon (theyounger brother and sister of the bridegroom), and Lady AliciaWhittington.
The whole party proceeded afterwards to the house ofMr. Aloysius Doran, at Lancaster Gate, where breakfast had beenprepared.
It appears that some little trouble was caused by awoman, whose name has not been ascertained, who endeavoured toforce her way into the house after the bridal party, allegingthat she had some claim upon Lord St. Simon.
It was only after apainful and prolonged scene that she was ejected by the butlerand the footman.
The bride, who had fortunately entered the housebefore this unpleasant interruption, had sat down to breakfastwith the rest, when she complained of a sudden indisposition andretired to her room.
Her prolonged absence having caused somecomment, her father followed her, but learned from her maid thatshe had only come up to her chamber for an instant, caught up anulster and bonnet, and hurried down to the passage.
One of thefootmen declared that he had seen a lady leave the house thusapparelled, but had refused to credit that it was his mistress,believing her to be with the company.
On ascertaining that hisdaughter had disappeared, Mr. Aloysius Doran, in conjunction withthe bridegroom, instantly put themselves in communication withthe police, and very energetic inquiries are being made, whichwill probably result in a speedy clearing up of this verysingular business.
Up to a late hour last night, however, nothinghad transpired as to the whereabouts of the missing lady.
Thereare rumours of foul play in the matter, and it is said that thepolice have caused the arrest of the woman who had caused theoriginal disturbance, in the belief that, from jealousy or someother motive, she may have been concerned in the strangedisappearance of the bride.'"
"And is that all?"
"Only one little item in another of the morning papers, but it isa suggestive one."
"And it is--""That Miss Flora Millar, the lady who had caused the disturbance,has actually been arrested.
It appears that she was formerly adanseuse at the Allegro, and that she has known the bridegroomfor some years.
There are no further particulars, and the wholecase is in your hands now--so far as it has been set forth in thepublic press."
"And an exceedingly interesting case it appears to be.
I wouldnot have missed it for worlds.
But there is a ring at the bell,Watson, and as the clock makes it a few minutes after four, Ihave no doubt that this will prove to be our noble client.
Do notdream of going, Watson, for I very much prefer having a witness,if only as a check to my own memory."
"Lord Robert St. Simon," announced our page-boy, throwing openthe door.
A gentleman entered, with a pleasant, cultured face,high-nosed and pale, with something perhaps of petulance aboutthe mouth, and with the steady, well-opened eye of a man whosepleasant lot it had ever been to command and to be obeyed.
Hismanner was brisk, and yet his general appearance gave an undueimpression of age, for he had a slight forward stoop and a littlebend of the knees as he walked.
His hair, too, as he swept offhis very curly-brimmed hat, was grizzled round the edges and thinupon the top.
As to his dress, it was careful to the verge offoppishness, with high collar, black frock-coat, white waistcoat,yellow gloves, patent-leather shoes, and light-coloured gaiters.
He advanced slowly into the room, turning his head from left toright, and swinging in his right hand the cord which held hisgolden eyeglasses.
"Good-day, Lord St. Simon," said Holmes, rising and bowing.
"Praytake the basket-chair.
This is my friend and colleague, Dr.Watson.
Draw up a little to the fire, and we will talk thismatter over."
"A most painful matter to me, as you can most readily imagine,Mr. Holmes.
I have been cut to the quick.
I understand that youhave already managed several delicate cases of this sort, sir,though I presume that they were hardly from the same class ofsociety."
"No, I am descending."
"I beg pardon."
"My last client of the sort was a king."
"Oh, really!
I had no idea.
And which king?"
"The King of Scandinavia."
"What!
Had he lost his wife?"
"You can understand," said Holmes suavely, "that I extend to theaffairs of my other clients the same secrecy which I promise toyou in yours."
"Of course!
Very right!
very right!
I'm sure I beg pardon.
As tomy own case, I am ready to give you any information which mayassist you in forming an opinion."
"Thank you.
I have already learned all that is in the publicprints, nothing more.
I presume that I may take it as correct--thisarticle, for example, as to the disappearance of the bride."
Lord St. Simon glanced over it.
"Yes, it is correct, as far as itgoes."
"But it needs a great deal of supplementing before anyone couldoffer an opinion.
I think that I may arrive at my facts mostdirectly by questioning you."
"Pray do so."
"When did you first meet Miss Hatty Doran?"
"In San Francisco, a year ago."
"You were travelling in the States?"
"Yes."
"Did you become engaged then?"
"No."
"But you were on a friendly footing?"
"I was amused by her society, and she could see that I wasamused."
"Her father is very rich?"
"He is said to be the richest man on the Pacific slope."
"And how did he make his money?"
"In mining.
He had nothing a few years ago.
Then he struck gold,invested it, and came up by leaps and bounds."
"Now, what is your own impression as to the young lady's--yourwife's character?"
The nobleman swung his glasses a little faster and stared downinto the fire.
"You see, Mr. Holmes," said he, "my wife wastwenty before her father became a rich man.
During that time sheran free in a mining camp and wandered through woods ormountains, so that her education has come from Nature rather thanfrom the schoolmaster.
She is what we call in England a tomboy,with a strong nature, wild and free, unfettered by any sort oftraditions.
She is impetuous--volcanic, I was about to say.
Sheis swift in making up her mind and fearless in carrying out herresolutions.
On the other hand, I would not have given her thename which I have the honour to bear"--he gave a little statelycough--"had not I thought her to be at bottom a noble woman.
Ibelieve that she is capable of heroic self-sacrifice and thatanything dishonourable would be repugnant to her."
"Have you her photograph?"
"I brought this with me."
He opened a locket and showed us thefull face of a very lovely woman.
It was not a photograph but anivory miniature, and the artist had brought out the full effectof the lustrous black hair, the large dark eyes, and theexquisite mouth.
Holmes gazed long and earnestly at it.
Then heclosed the locket and handed it back to Lord St. Simon.
"The young lady came to London, then, and you renewed youracquaintance?"
"Yes, her father brought her over for this last London season.
Imet her several times, became engaged to her, and have nowmarried her."
"She brought, I understand, a considerable dowry?"
"A fair dowry.
Not more than is usual in my family."
"And this, of course, remains to you, since the marriage is afait accompli?"
"I really have made no inquiries on the subject."
"Very naturally not.
Did you see Miss Doran on the day before thewedding?"
"Yes."
"Was she in good spirits?"
"Never better.
She kept talking of what we should do in ourfuture lives."
"Indeed!
That is very interesting.
And on the morning of thewedding?"
"She was as bright as possible--at least until after theceremony."
"And did you observe any change in her then?"
"Well, to tell the truth, I saw then the first signs that I hadever seen that her temper was just a little sharp.
The incidenthowever, was too trivial to relate and can have no possiblebearing upon the case."
"Pray let us have it, for all that."
"Oh, it is childish.
She dropped her bouquet as we went towardsthe vestry.
She was passing the front pew at the time, and itfell over into the pew.
There was a moment's delay, but thegentleman in the pew handed it up to her again, and it did notappear to be the worse for the fall.
Yet when I spoke to her ofthe matter, she answered me abruptly; and in the carriage, on ourway home, she seemed absurdly agitated over this trifling cause."
"Indeed!
You say that there was a gentleman in the pew.
Some ofthe general public were present, then?"
"Oh, yes.
It is impossible to exclude them when the church isopen."
"This gentleman was not one of your wife's friends?"
"No, no; I call him a gentleman by courtesy, but he was quite acommon-looking person.
I hardly noticed his appearance.
Butreally I think that we are wandering rather far from the point."
"Lady St. Simon, then, returned from the wedding in a lesscheerful frame of mind than she had gone to it.
What did she doon re-entering her father's house?"
"I saw her in conversation with her maid."
"And who is her maid?"
"Alice is her name.
She is an American and came from Californiawith her."
"A confidential servant?"
"A little too much so.
It seemed to me that her mistress allowedher to take great liberties.
Still, of course, in America theylook upon these things in a different way."
"How long did she speak to this Alice?"
"Oh, a few minutes.
I had something else to think of."
"You did not overhear what they said?"
"Lady St. Simon said something about 'jumping a claim.'
She wasaccustomed to use slang of the kind.
I have no idea what shemeant."
"American slang is very expressive sometimes.
And what did yourwife do when she finished speaking to her maid?"
"She walked into the breakfast-room."
"On your arm?"
"No, alone.
She was very independent in little matters like that.
Then, after we had sat down for ten minutes or so, she rosehurriedly, muttered some words of apology, and left the room.
Shenever came back."
"But this maid, Alice, as I understand, deposes that she went toher room, covered her bride's dress with a long ulster, put on abonnet, and went out."
"Quite so.
And she was afterwards seen walking into Hyde Park incompany with Flora Millar, a woman who is now in custody, and whohad already made a disturbance at Mr. Doran's house thatmorning."
"Ah, yes.
I should like a few particulars as to this young lady,and your relations to her."
Lord St. Simon shrugged his shoulders and raised his eyebrows.
"We have been on a friendly footing for some years--I may say ona very friendly footing.
She used to be at the Allegro.
I havenot treated her ungenerously, and she had no just cause ofcomplaint against me, but you know what women are, Mr. Holmes.
Flora was a dear little thing, but exceedingly hot-headed anddevotedly attached to me.
She wrote me dreadful letters when sheheard that I was about to be married, and, to tell the truth, thereason why I had the marriage celebrated so quietly was that Ifeared lest there might be a scandal in the church.
She came toMr. Doran's door just after we returned, and she endeavoured topush her way in, uttering very abusive expressions towards mywife, and even threatening her, but I had foreseen thepossibility of something of the sort, and I had two policefellows there in private clothes, who soon pushed her out again.
She was quiet when she saw that there was no good in making arow."
"Did your wife hear all this?"
"No, thank goodness, she did not."
"And she was seen walking with this very woman afterwards?"
"Yes.
That is what Mr. Lestrade, of Scotland Yard, looks upon asso serious.
It is thought that Flora decoyed my wife out and laidsome terrible trap for her."
"Well, it is a possible supposition."
"You think so, too?"
"I did not say a probable one.
But you do not yourself look uponthis as likely?"
"I do not think Flora would hurt a fly."
"Still, jealousy is a strange transformer of characters.
Praywhat is your own theory as to what took place?"
"Well, really, I came to seek a theory, not to propound one.
Ihave given you all the facts.
Since you ask me, however, I maysay that it has occurred to me as possible that the excitement ofthis affair, the consciousness that she had made so immense asocial stride, had the effect of causing some little nervousdisturbance in my wife."
"In short, that she had become suddenly deranged?"
"Well, really, when I consider that she has turned her back--Iwill not say upon me, but upon so much that many have aspired towithout success--I can hardly explain it in any other fashion."
"Well, certainly that is also a conceivable hypothesis," saidHolmes, smiling.
"And now, Lord St. Simon, I think that I havenearly all my data.
May I ask whether you were seated at thebreakfast-table so that you could see out of the window?"
"We could see the other side of the road and the Park."
"Quite so.
Then I do not think that I need to detain you longer.
I shall communicate with you."
"Should you be fortunate enough to solve this problem," said ourclient, rising.
"I have solved it."
"Eh?
What was that?"
"I say that I have solved it."
"Where, then, is my wife?"
"That is a detail which I shall speedily supply."
Lord St. Simon shook his head.
"I am afraid that it will takewiser heads than yours or mine," he remarked, and bowing in astately, old-fashioned manner he departed.
"It is very good of Lord St. Simon to honour my head by puttingit on a level with his own," said Sherlock Holmes, laughing.
"Ithink that I shall have a whisky and soda and a cigar after allthis cross-questioning.
I had formed my conclusions as to thecase before our client came into the room."
"My dear Holmes!"
"I have notes of several similar cases, though none, as Iremarked before, which were quite as prompt.
My whole examinationserved to turn my conjecture into a certainty.
Circumstantialevidence is occasionally very convincing, as when you find atrout in the milk, to quote Thoreau's example."
"But I have heard all that you have heard."
"Without, however, the knowledge of pre-existing cases whichserves me so well.
There was a parallel instance in Aberdeen someyears back, and something on very much the same lines at Munichthe year after the Franco-Prussian War.
It is one of thesecases--but, hullo, here is Lestrade!
Good-afternoon, Lestrade!
You will find an extra tumbler upon the sideboard, and there arecigars in the box."
The official detective was attired in a pea-jacket and cravat,which gave him a decidedly nautical appearance, and he carried ablack canvas bag in his hand.
With a short greeting he seatedhimself and lit the cigar which had been offered to him.
"What's up, then?"
asked Holmes with a twinkle in his eye.
"Youlook dissatisfied."
"And I feel dissatisfied.
It is this infernal St. Simon marriagecase.
I can make neither head nor tail of the business."
"Really!
You surprise me."
"Who ever heard of such a mixed affair?
Every clue seems to slipthrough my fingers.
I have been at work upon it all day."
"And very wet it seems to have made you," said Holmes laying hishand upon the arm of the pea-jacket.
"Yes, I have been dragging the Serpentine."
"In heaven's name, what for?"
"In search of the body of Lady St.
Simon."
Sherlock Holmes leaned back in his chair and laughed heartily.
"Have you dragged the basin of Trafalgar Square fountain?"
heasked.
"Why?
What do you mean?"
"Because you have just as good a chance of finding this lady inthe one as in the other."
Lestrade shot an angry glance at my companion.
"I suppose youknow all about it," he snarled.
"Well, I have only just heard the facts, but my mind is made up."
"Oh, indeed!
Then you think that the Serpentine plays no part inthe matter?"
"I think it very unlikely."
"Then perhaps you will kindly explain how it is that we foundthis in it?"
He opened his bag as he spoke, and tumbled onto thefloor a wedding-dress of watered silk, a pair of white satinshoes and a bride's wreath and veil, all discoloured and soakedin water.
"There," said he, putting a new wedding-ring upon thetop of the pile.
"There is a little nut for you to crack, MasterHolmes."
"Oh, indeed!"
said my friend, blowing blue rings into the air.
"You dragged them from the Serpentine?"
"No.
They were found floating near the margin by a park-keeper.
They have been identified as her clothes, and it seemed to methat if the clothes were there the body would not be far off."
"By the same brilliant reasoning, every man's body is to be foundin the neighbourhood of his wardrobe.
And pray what did you hopeto arrive at through this?"
"At some evidence implicating Flora Millar in the disappearance."
"I am afraid that you will find it difficult."
"Are you, indeed, now?"
cried Lestrade with some bitterness.
"Iam afraid, Holmes, that you are not very practical with yourdeductions and your inferences.
You have made two blunders in asmany minutes.
This dress does implicate Miss Flora Millar."
"And how?"
"In the dress is a pocket.
In the pocket is a card-case.
In thecard-case is a note.
And here is the very note."
He slapped itdown upon the table in front of him.
"Listen to this: 'You willsee me when all is ready.
Come at once.
F.H.M.'
Now my theory allalong has been that Lady St. Simon was decoyed away by FloraMillar, and that she, with confederates, no doubt, wasresponsible for her disappearance.
Here, signed with herinitials, is the very note which was no doubt quietly slippedinto her hand at the door and which lured her within theirreach."
"Very good, Lestrade," said Holmes, laughing.
"You really arevery fine indeed.
Let me see it."
He took up the paper in alistless way, but his attention instantly became riveted, and hegave a little cry of satisfaction.
"This is indeed important,"said he.
"Ha!
you find it so?"
"Extremely so.
I congratulate you warmly."
Lestrade rose in his triumph and bent his head to look.
"Why," heshrieked, "you're looking at the wrong side!"
"On the contrary, this is the right side."
"The right side?
You're mad!
Here is the note written in pencilover here."
"And over here is what appears to be the fragment of a hotelbill, which interests me deeply."
"There's nothing in it.
I looked at it before," said Lestrade.
"'Oct.
4th, rooms 8s., breakfast 2s.
6d., cocktail 1s., lunch 2s.
6d., glass sherry, 8d.'
I see nothing in that."
"Very likely not.
It is most important, all the same.
As to thenote, it is important also, or at least the initials are, so Icongratulate you again."
"I've wasted time enough," said Lestrade, rising.
"I believe inhard work and not in sitting by the fire spinning fine theories.
Good-day, Mr. Holmes, and we shall see which gets to the bottomof the matter first."
He gathered up the garments, thrust theminto the bag, and made for the door.
"Just one hint to you, Lestrade," drawled Holmes before his rivalvanished; "I will tell you the true solution of the matter.
LadySt. Simon is a myth.
There is not, and there never has been, anysuch person."
Lestrade looked sadly at my companion.
Then he turned to me,tapped his forehead three times, shook his head solemnly, andhurried away.
He had hardly shut the door behind him when Holmes rose to put onhis overcoat.
"There is something in what the fellow says aboutoutdoor work," he remarked, "so I think, Watson, that I mustleave you to your papers for a little."
It was after five o'clock when Sherlock Holmes left me, but I hadno time to be lonely, for within an hour there arrived aconfectioner's man with a very large flat box.
This he unpackedwith the help of a youth whom he had brought with him, andpresently, to my very great astonishment, a quite epicureanlittle cold supper began to be laid out upon our humblelodging-house mahogany.
There were a couple of brace of coldwoodcock, a pheasant, a pâté de foie gras pie with a group ofancient and cobwebby bottles.
Having laid out all these luxuries,my two visitors vanished away, like the genii of the ArabianNights, with no explanation save that the things had been paidfor and were ordered to this address.
Just before nine o'clock Sherlock Holmes stepped briskly into theroom.
His features were gravely set, but there was a light in hiseye which made me think that he had not been disappointed in hisconclusions.
"They have laid the supper, then," he said, rubbing his hands.
"You seem to expect company.
They have laid for five."
"Yes, I fancy we may have some company dropping in," said he.
"Iam surprised that Lord St. Simon has not already arrived.
Ha!
Ifancy that I hear his step now upon the stairs."
It was indeed our visitor of the afternoon who came bustling in,dangling his glasses more vigorously than ever, and with a veryperturbed expression upon his aristocratic features.
"My messenger reached you, then?"
asked Holmes.
"Yes, and I confess that the contents startled me beyond measure.
Have you good authority for what you say?"
"The best possible."
Lord St. Simon sank into a chair and passed his hand over hisforehead.
"What will the Duke say," he murmured, "when he hears that one ofthe family has been subjected to such humiliation?"
"It is the purest accident.
I cannot allow that there is anyhumiliation."
"Ah, you look on these things from another standpoint."
"I fail to see that anyone is to blame.
I can hardly see how thelady could have acted otherwise, though her abrupt method ofdoing it was undoubtedly to be regretted.
Having no mother, shehad no one to advise her at such a crisis."
"It was a slight, sir, a public slight," said Lord St. Simon,tapping his fingers upon the table.
"You must make allowance for this poor girl, placed in sounprecedented a position."
"I will make no allowance.
I am very angry indeed, and I havebeen shamefully used."
"I think that I heard a ring," said Holmes.
"Yes, there are stepson the landing.
If I cannot persuade you to take a lenient viewof the matter, Lord St. Simon, I have brought an advocate herewho may be more successful."
He opened the door and ushered in alady and gentleman.
"Lord St. Simon," said he "allow me tointroduce you to Mr. and Mrs. Francis Hay Moulton.
The lady, Ithink, you have already met."
At the sight of these newcomers our client had sprung from hisseat and stood very erect, with his eyes cast down and his handthrust into the breast of his frock-coat, a picture of offendeddignity.
The lady had taken a quick step forward and had held outher hand to him, but he still refused to raise his eyes.
It wasas well for his resolution, perhaps, for her pleading face wasone which it was hard to resist.
"You're angry, Robert," said she.
"Well, I guess you have everycause to be."
"Pray make no apology to me," said Lord St. Simon bitterly.
"Oh, yes, I know that I have treated you real bad and that Ishould have spoken to you before I went; but I was kind ofrattled, and from the time when I saw Frank here again I justdidn't know what I was doing or saying.
I only wonder I didn'tfall down and do a faint right there before the altar."
"Perhaps, Mrs. Moulton, you would like my friend and me to leavethe room while you explain this matter?"
"If I may give an opinion," remarked the strange gentleman,"we've had just a little too much secrecy over this businessalready.
For my part, I should like all Europe and America tohear the rights of it."
He was a small, wiry, sunburnt man,clean-shaven, with a sharp face and alert manner.
"Then I'll tell our story right away," said the lady.
"Frank hereand I met in '84, in McQuire's camp, near the Rockies, where pawas working a claim.
We were engaged to each other, Frank and I;but then one day father struck a rich pocket and made a pile,while poor Frank here had a claim that petered out and came tonothing.
The richer pa grew the poorer was Frank; so at last pawouldn't hear of our engagement lasting any longer, and he tookme away to 'Frisco.
Frank wouldn't throw up his hand, though; sohe followed me there, and he saw me without pa knowing anythingabout it.
It would only have made him mad to know, so we justfixed it all up for ourselves.
Frank said that he would go andmake his pile, too, and never come back to claim me until he hadas much as pa.
So then I promised to wait for him to the end oftime and pledged myself not to marry anyone else while he lived.
'Why shouldn't we be married right away, then,' said he, 'andthen I will feel sure of you; and I won't claim to be yourhusband until I come back?'
Well, we talked it over, and he hadfixed it all up so nicely, with a clergyman all ready in waiting,that we just did it right there; and then Frank went off to seekhis fortune, and I went back to pa."The next I heard of Frank was that he was in Montana, and thenhe went prospecting in Arizona, and then I heard of him from NewMexico.
After that came a long newspaper story about how aminers' camp had been attacked by Apache Indians, and there wasmy Frank's name among the killed.
I fainted dead away, and I wasvery sick for months after.
Pa thought I had a decline and tookme to half the doctors in 'Frisco.
Not a word of news came for ayear and more, so that I never doubted that Frank was reallydead.
Then Lord St. Simon came to 'Frisco, and we came to London,and a marriage was arranged, and pa was very pleased, but I feltall the time that no man on this earth would ever take the placein my heart that had been given to my poor Frank.
"Still, if I had married Lord St. Simon, of course I'd have donemy duty by him.
We can't command our love, but we can ouractions.
I went to the altar with him with the intention to makehim just as good a wife as it was in me to be.
But you mayimagine what I felt when, just as I came to the altar rails, Iglanced back and saw Frank standing and looking at me out of thefirst pew.
I thought it was his ghost at first; but when I lookedagain there he was still, with a kind of question in his eyes, asif to ask me whether I were glad or sorry to see him.
I wonder Ididn't drop.
I know that everything was turning round, and thewords of the clergyman were just like the buzz of a bee in myear.
I didn't know what to do.
Should I stop the service and makea scene in the church?
I glanced at him again, and he seemed toknow what I was thinking, for he raised his finger to his lips totell me to be still.
Then I saw him scribble on a piece of paper,and I knew that he was writing me a note.
As I passed his pew onthe way out I dropped my bouquet over to him, and he slipped thenote into my hand when he returned me the flowers.
It was only aline asking me to join him when he made the sign to me to do so.
Of course I never doubted for a moment that my first duty was nowto him, and I determined to do just whatever he might direct.
"When I got back I told my maid, who had known him in California,and had always been his friend.
I ordered her to say nothing, butto get a few things packed and my ulster ready.
I know I ought tohave spoken to Lord St. Simon, but it was dreadful hard beforehis mother and all those great people.
I just made up my mind torun away and explain afterwards.
I hadn't been at the table tenminutes before I saw Frank out of the window at the other side ofthe road.
He beckoned to me and then began walking into the Park.
I slipped out, put on my things, and followed him.
Some womancame talking something or other about Lord St. Simon tome--seemed to me from the little I heard as if he had a littlesecret of his own before marriage also--but I managed to get awayfrom her and soon overtook Frank.
We got into a cab together, andaway we drove to some lodgings he had taken in Gordon Square, andthat was my true wedding after all those years of waiting.
Frankhad been a prisoner among the Apaches, had escaped, came on to'Frisco, found that I had given him up for dead and had gone toEngland, followed me there, and had come upon me at last on thevery morning of my second wedding."
"I saw it in a paper," explained the American.
"It gave the nameand the church but not where the lady lived."
"Then we had a talk as to what we should do, and Frank was allfor openness, but I was so ashamed of it all that I felt as if Ishould like to vanish away and never see any of them again--justsending a line to pa, perhaps, to show him that I was alive.
Itwas awful to me to think of all those lords and ladies sittinground that breakfast-table and waiting for me to come back.
SoFrank took my wedding-clothes and things and made a bundle ofthem, so that I should not be traced, and dropped them awaysomewhere where no one could find them.
It is likely that weshould have gone on to Paris to-morrow, only that this goodgentleman, Mr. Holmes, came round to us this evening, though howhe found us is more than I can think, and he showed us veryclearly and kindly that I was wrong and that Frank was right, andthat we should be putting ourselves in the wrong if we were sosecret.
Then he offered to give us a chance of talking to LordSt. Simon alone, and so we came right away round to his rooms atonce.
Now, Robert, you have heard it all, and I am very sorry ifI have given you pain, and I hope that you do not think verymeanly of me."
Lord St. Simon had by no means relaxed his rigid attitude, buthad listened with a frowning brow and a compressed lip to thislong narrative.
"Excuse me," he said, "but it is not my custom to discuss my mostintimate personal affairs in this public manner."
"Then you won't forgive me?
You won't shake hands before I go?"
"Oh, certainly, if it would give you any pleasure."
He put outhis hand and coldly grasped that which she extended to him.
"I had hoped," suggested Holmes, "that you would have joined usin a friendly supper."
"I think that there you ask a little too much," responded hisLordship.
"I may be forced to acquiesce in these recentdevelopments, but I can hardly be expected to make merry overthem.
I think that with your permission I will now wish you all avery good-night."
He included us all in a sweeping bow andstalked out of the room.
"Then I trust that you at least will honour me with yourcompany," said Sherlock Holmes.
"It is always a joy to meet anAmerican, Mr. Moulton, for I am one of those who believe that thefolly of a monarch and the blundering of a minister in far-goneyears will not prevent our children from being some day citizensof the same world-wide country under a flag which shall be aquartering of the Union Jack with the Stars and Stripes."
"The case has been an interesting one," remarked Holmes when ourvisitors had left us, "because it serves to show very clearly howsimple the explanation may be of an affair which at first sightseems to be almost inexplicable.
Nothing could be more naturalthan the sequence of events as narrated by this lady, and nothingstranger than the result when viewed, for instance, by Mr.Lestrade of Scotland Yard."
"You were not yourself at fault at all, then?"
"From the first, two facts were very obvious to me, the one thatthe lady had been quite willing to undergo the wedding ceremony,the other that she had repented of it within a few minutes ofreturning home.
Obviously something had occurred during themorning, then, to cause her to change her mind.
What could thatsomething be?
She could not have spoken to anyone when she wasout, for she had been in the company of the bridegroom.
Had sheseen someone, then?
If she had, it must be someone from Americabecause she had spent so short a time in this country that shecould hardly have allowed anyone to acquire so deep an influenceover her that the mere sight of him would induce her to changeher plans so completely.
You see we have already arrived, by aprocess of exclusion, at the idea that she might have seen anAmerican.
Then who could this American be, and why should hepossess so much influence over her?
